https://www.bbc.com/programmes/w3ct6zj2




BBC World Service - Stumped, Wisden's top five and what next for West Indies women?



















































 





  



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    





BBC World Service


                Stumped
            

 HomeEpisodesClipsGalleriesPodcastFollow Stumped on TwitterJoin Sportsworld on Facebook 

Main content











Listen now







Wisden's top five and what next for West Indies women?


Stumped






 


The Wisden Almanack is released and West Indies miss out on the Women's ODI World Cup.

Show more



This episode contains references to suicide. If you are suffering distress or despair and need support, you could speak to a health professional, or an organisation that offers support. Details of help available in many countries can be found at Befrienders Worldwide: befrienders.org
The Women’s World Cup qualifiers have reached their conclusion with Pakistan and Bangladesh making it through to the ODI World Cup later this year. Alison Mitchell, Jim Maxwell and Charu Sharma discuss their prospects in the tournament. We also reflect on West Indies who have missed out on the Women's World Cup for the first time in 25 years.
Plus, we are joined by Lawrence Booth, the editor of the 162nd edition of the Wisden Almanack, he shares his strong opinions on the global game and reveals the name of the five Wisden cricketers of the year. 
We hear from Australia all-rounder Cameron Green on his kidney condition and Ashes dreams.
Photo: Hayley Matthews of West Indies looks dejected after defeat to New Zealand during the ICC Women's T20 World Cup Semi-Final 2024 match between West Indies and New Zealand at Sharjah Cricket Stadium on October 18, 2024 in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates. (Photo by Alex Davidson-ICC/ICC via Getty Images)

Show less










                        Download                    






 Choose your file
                        




                                    Higher quality (128kbps)
                                



                                    Lower quality (64kbps)
                                










                                    Available now
                            

36 minutes
            







 
Last on 

Saturday
01:32GMT

BBC World Service Australasia, Online, Americas and the Caribbean, UK DAB/Freeview & South Asia only



 
More episodes



Previous











'Best possible news' for Afghanistan women and Tanzania make history






Next




Stumped







            See all episodes from Stumped
        














Featured








.










Broadcast





 

Saturday
01:32GMT

BBC World Service Australasia, Online, Americas and the Caribbean, UK DAB/Freeview & South Asia only













Cricket Outposts




Cricket stories from Afghanistan to Zimbabwe from BBC Stumped


Click here for our global stories






The Big Hitters




Cricket's biggest names past and present talk to Stumped.


Click here for big name interviews from BBC Stumped






The Funny Side of Cricket




Funny cricket stories from around the world from BBC Stumped


Click here for our funny cricket stories






Women at the Wicket




Women’s cricket stories from around the world


Click here for our best stories from the women's game







Podcast











Stumped

The weekly cricket show from BBC Sport in association with ABC and  Akashvani.














Related Content


Similar programmes
By genre:
Sport > Cricket

By format:

Podcasts




 




Online schedule

Downloads

Help & FAQs

Contact us

News in 39 languages









 


     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                   




