https://www.bbc.com/programmes/p0l6c7z8




BBC Radio 5 Live - Football Daily, Euro Leagues: The Pope’s love of football, & tributes to Leo Beenhakker



















































  





  



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    





BBC Radio 5 Live

Football Daily

 HomeAll episodes606 podcastBBC Sport: FootballBBC Sport: TablesBBC Sport: GossipUEFA Euro 2024 

Main content











Listen now







Euro Leagues: The Pope’s love of football, & tributes to Leo Beenhakker


Football Daily






 


Steve Crossman is joined by Guillem Balague, Mina Rzouki & Julien Laurens on Euro Leagues

Show more



Steve Crossman is joined by Guillem Balague, Mina Rzouki and Julien Laurens to talk the latest in European football.
The team pay tribute to Pope Francis and his love of football. Are Inter Milan falling at the final hurdle of the season, and should title playoffs exist?
The tributes continue as Marcel van der Kraan joins the pod to reflect on the life and career of Dutch footballer and coach, Leo Beenhakker.
And finally, who are the other universally loved coaches of the modern game?
02:07 Tribute to Pope Francis10:31 Are Inter collapsing?17:20 Should title playoffs exist?26:00 Leo Beenhakker tribute34:42 Ancelotti’s future, & universally loved coaches
BBC Sounds / 5 Live / Radio 5 Sports Extra weekend commentaries:Sat 1500 Newcastle v Ipswich in the Premier League,Sat 1715 Crystal Palace v Aston Villa in the FA Cup semis,Sun 1400 Bournemouth v Man Utd in the Premier League,Sun 1400 Chelsea v Barcelona in the Women’s Champions League,Sun 1630 Liverpool v Tottenham in the Premier League,Sun 1630 Nottingham Forest v Man City in the FA Cup semis.

Show less










                        Download                    






 Choose your file
                        




                                    Higher quality (128kbps)
                                



                                    Lower quality (64kbps)
                                










Release date: 
24 April 2025


26 days left to listen


41 minutes
            







 
More episodes




            See all episodes from Football Daily
        
















Podcast











Football Daily

The latest news, insight, analysis and big name guests from the footballing world.














Related Content


Similar programmes
By genre:
Sport > Football

By format:

Podcasts




 




Schedule








 


     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                   




