https://www.bbc.com/usingthebbc/account/





































Get the best out of the BBC




















          Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































           Using the BBC 
          
        







Menu







Menu











                Your Information and Privacy
              



                Cookie and Browser Settings
              



                Creating and Using Your Account
              



                Terms of Use
              









                Help Registering and Signing in
              



                Account Features
              



                Personalisation and Recommendations
              









JavaScript has been disabled.

				This page needs JavaScript to work correctly. Please enable JavaScript in your browser
				settings.

				JavaScript is required for the following feature(s):

opening and closing the navbar (on mobile)




















Get the best out of the BBC
Having a BBC account gives you all sorts of ways to make the most of your BBC.









Read on to find out how to get your own BBC account, what it lets you do, and how it can help you discover more things you’ll love.
What's so great about signing in?



Help Registering and Signing In







What is a BBC account?









Help registering









Help signing in









Help updating your account details









Help with child accounts and profiles









How to sign out or delete your account










Account Features







Adding things on the BBC









What emails and newsletters will the BBC send me?









What are notifications?









How do I use and control notifications?









What happens to the comments I post on the BBC?









The BBC on voice devices










Personalisation and Recommendations







How is the BBC personalised to me?









What does "Recommended for you" mean?









About your personalisation settings









Change language:



Cymraeg




Gàidhlig













iPages Dev tools

Page built: Tue Dec 10 2024 14:16:23 GMT
Site ID: ipages-using-the-bbc
Built from: master @ d309a16











Rebuild Page
The page will automatically reload. You may need to reload again if the build takes longer than expected.
            


                    Rebuild page
                    




Useful links


                    View in iSite
                    




                    View page XML
                    




                    View JSON cache
                    




                    View in iPages Dashboard
                    




Demo mode
Hides preview environment warning banner on preview pages.



On

Off


Theme toggler
Select a theme and theme mode and click "Load theme" to load in your theme combination.


Theme:


Blue



Green



Internal



Pink



Purple



Red



Studios



Teal



Wales



Neutral



Theme Mode:


Dark



Default



Light



Load theme
Reset







     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                  


