https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wireless




Wireless - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Photophone








1.2
Electric wireless technology






1.2.1
Early wireless








1.2.2
Radio waves










1.3
Wireless revolution










2
Modes




Toggle Modes subsection





2.1
Radio








2.2
Wireless optical






2.2.1
Free-space optical (long-range)










2.3
Sonic








2.4
Electromagnetic induction










3
Services








4
Electromagnetic spectrum








5
Applications




Toggle Applications subsection





5.1
Mobile telephones








5.2
Data communications






5.2.1
Peripherals










5.3
Energy transfer








5.4
Medical technologies










6
Categories of implementations, devices, and standards








7
See also








8
References








9
Further reading








10
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Wireless



56 languages




العربيةAzərbaycancaবাংলাभोजपुरीБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתಕನ್ನಡქართულიLatviešuМакедонскиMalagasyमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuMinangkabauMirandésМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語PortuguêsRomânăРусскийShqipSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیSuomiTagalogதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوVèneto吴语粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Transfer of information or power that does not require the use of physical wires
For other uses, see Wireless (disambiguation).
"Over the air broadcasting" redirects here. For the technology over the air television, see Terrestrial television.


A handheld on-board communication station of the maritime mobile service 
Part of a series onAntennas
Common types
Dipole
Fractal
Loop
Monopole
Satellite dish
Television
Whip


Components
Balun
Block upconverter
Coaxial cable
Counterpoise (ground system)
Feed
Feed line
Low-noise block downconverter
Passive radiator
Receiver
Rotator
Stub
Transmitter
Tuner
Twin-lead


Systems
Antenna farm
Amateur radio
Cellular network
Hotspot
Municipal wireless network
Radio
Radio masts and towers
Wi-Fi
Wireless


Safety and regulation
Wireless device radiation and health
Wireless electronic devices and health
International Telecommunication Union(Radio Regulations)
World Radiocommunication Conference

Radiation sources / regions
Boresight
Focal cloud
Ground plane
Main lobe
Near and far field
Side lobe
Vertical plane


Characteristics
Array gain
Directivity
Efficiency
Electrical length
Equivalent radius
Factor
Friis transmission equation
Gain
Height
Radiation pattern
Radiation resistance
Radio propagation
Radio spectrum
Signal-to-noise ratio
Spurious emission


Techniques
Beam steering
Beam tilt
Beamforming
Small cell

Bell Laboratories LayeredSpace-Time (BLAST)
Massive Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)

Reconfiguration
Spread spectrum

Wideband Space DivisionMultiple Access (WSDMA)
vte
Wireless communication (or just wireless, when the context allows) is the transfer of information (telecommunication) between two or more points without the use of an electrical conductor, optical fiber or other continuous guided medium for the transfer. The most common wireless technologies use radio waves. With radio waves, intended distances can be short, such as a few meters for Bluetooth, or as far as millions of kilometers for deep-space radio communications. It encompasses various types of fixed, mobile, and portable applications, including two-way radios, cellular telephones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and wireless networking. Other examples of applications of radio wireless technology include GPS units, garage door openers, wireless computer mouse, keyboards and headsets, headphones, radio receivers, satellite television, broadcast television and cordless telephones. Somewhat less common methods of achieving wireless communications involve other electromagnetic phenomena, such as light and magnetic or electric fields, or the use of sound.
The term wireless has been used twice in communications history, with slightly different meanings. It was initially used from about 1890 for the first radio transmitting and receiving technology, as in wireless telegraphy, until the new word radio replaced it around 1920. Radio sets in the UK and the English-speaking world that were not portable continued to be referred to as wireless sets into the 1960s.[1][2] The term wireless was revived in the 1980s and 1990s mainly to distinguish digital devices that communicate without wires, such as the examples listed in the previous paragraph, from those that require wires or cables. This became its primary usage in the 2000s, due to the advent of technologies such as mobile broadband, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth.
Wireless operations permit services, such as mobile and interplanetary communications, that are impossible or impractical to implement with the use of wires. The term is commonly used in the telecommunications industry to refer to telecommunications systems (e.g. radio transmitters and receivers, remote controls, etc.) that use some form of energy (e.g. radio waves and acoustic energy) to transfer information without the use of wires.[3][4][5] Information is transferred in this manner over both short and long distances.


History[edit]
See also: History of telecommunication
Photophone[edit]
Main article: Photophone
Bell and Tainter's photophone, of 1880.
The first wireless telephone conversation occurred in 1880 when Alexander Graham Bell and Charles Sumner Tainter invented the photophone, a telephone that sent audio over a beam of light. The photophone required sunlight to operate, and a clear line of sight between the transmitter and receiver, which greatly decreased the viability of the photophone in any practical use.[6] It would be several decades before the photophone's principles found their first practical applications in military communications and later in fiber-optic communications.

Electric wireless technology[edit]
Early wireless[edit]
Main article: Wireless telegraphy
A number of wireless electrical signaling schemes including sending electric currents through water and the ground using electrostatic and electromagnetic induction were investigated for telegraphy in the late 19th century before practical radio systems became available. These included a patented induction system by Thomas Edison allowing a telegraph on a running train to connect with telegraph wires running parallel to the tracks, a William Preece induction telegraph system for sending messages across bodies of water, and several operational and proposed telegraphy and voice earth conduction systems.
The Edison system was used by stranded trains during the Great Blizzard of 1888 and earth conductive systems found limited use between trenches during World War I but these systems were never successful economically.

Radio waves[edit]
Main article: History of radio
Marconi transmitting the first radio signal across the Atlantic.
In 1894, Guglielmo Marconi began developing a wireless telegraph system using radio waves, which had been known about since proof of their existence in 1888 by Heinrich Hertz, but discounted as a communication format since they seemed, at the time, to be a short-range phenomenon.[7] Marconi soon developed a system that was transmitting signals way beyond distances anyone could have predicted (due in part to the signals bouncing off the then unknown ionosphere). Marconi and Karl Ferdinand Braun were awarded the 1909 Nobel Prize for Physics for their contribution to this form of wireless telegraphy.
Millimetre wave communication was first investigated by Jagadish Chandra Bose during 1894–1896, when he reached an extremely high frequency of up to 60 GHz in his experiments.[8] He also introduced the use of semiconductor junctions to detect radio waves,[9] when he patented the radio crystal detector in 1901.[10][11]

Wireless revolution[edit]
Power MOSFETs, which are used in RF power amplifiers to boost radio frequency (RF) signals in long-distance wireless networks.
The wireless revolution began in the 1990s,[12][13][14] with the advent of digital wireless networks leading to a social revolution, and a paradigm shift from wired to wireless technology,[15] including the proliferation of commercial wireless technologies such as cell phones, mobile telephony, pagers, wireless computer networks,[12] cellular networks, the wireless Internet, and laptop and handheld computers with wireless connections.[16] The wireless revolution has been driven by advances in radio frequency (RF), microelectronics, and microwave engineering,[12] and the transition from analog to digital RF technology,[15][16] which enabled a substantial increase in voice traffic along with the delivery of digital data such as text messaging, images and streaming media.[15]

Modes[edit]
Wireless communications can be via:

Radio[edit]
Main article: Radio communication
Further information: Microwave transmission
Radio and microwave communication carry information by modulating properties of electromagnetic waves transmitted through space. Specifically, the transmitter generates artificial electromagnetic waves by applying time-varying electric currents to its antenna. The waves travel away from the antenna until they eventually reach the antenna of a receiver, which induces an electric current in the receiving antenna. This current can be detected and demodulated to recreate the information sent by the transmitter.

Wireless optical[edit]
This section is an excerpt from Optical wireless communications.[edit]
Optical wireless communications (OWC) is a form of optical communication in which unguided light is used "in the air" (or in outer space), without an optical fiber. Visible, infrared (IR), or ultraviolet (UV) light is used to carry a wireless signal. It is generally used in short-range communication; extensions exist for long-range and ultra-long range.
OWC systems operating in the visible band (390–750 nm) are commonly referred to as visible light communication (VLC). VLC systems take advantage of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) which can be pulsed at very high speeds without a noticeable effect on the lighting output and human eye. VLC can be possibly used in a wide range of applications including wireless local area networks, wireless personal area networks and vehicular networks, among others.[17] On the other hand, terrestrial point-to-point OWC systems, also known as the free space optical (FSO) systems,[18] operate at the near IR frequencies (750–1600 nm). These systems typically use laser transmitters and offer a cost-effective protocol-transparent link with high data rates, i.e., 10 Gbit/s per wavelength, and provide a potential solution for the backhaul bottleneck.

There has also been a growing interest in ultraviolet communication (UVC) as a result of recent progress in solid-state optical sources/detectors operating within solar-blind UV spectrum (200–280 nm). In this so-called deep UV band, solar radiation is negligible at the ground level and this makes possible the design of photon-counting detectors with wide field-of-view receivers that increase the received energy with little additional background noise. Such designs are particularly useful for outdoor non-line-of-sight configurations to support low-power short-range UVC such as in wireless sensors and ad-hoc networks.
Free-space optical (long-range)[edit]
Main article: Free-space optical communication
An 8-beam free space optics laser link, rated for 1 Gbit/s at a distance of approximately 2 km. The receptor is the large disc in the middle, and the transmitters are the smaller ones. To the top and right corner is a monocular for assisting the alignment of the two heads. Free-space optical communication (FSO) is an optical communication technology that uses light propagating in free space to transmit wireless data for telecommunications or computer networking. "Free space" means the light beams travel through the open air or outer space. This contrasts with other communication technologies that use light beams traveling through transmission lines such as optical fiber or dielectric "light pipes".
The technology is useful where physical connections are impractical due to high costs or other considerations. For example, free space optical links are used in cities between office buildings that are not wired for networking, where the cost of running cable through the building and under the street would be prohibitive. Another widely used example is consumer IR devices such as remote controls and IrDA (Infrared Data Association) networking, which is used as an alternative to WiFi networking to allow laptops, PDAs, printers, and digital cameras to exchange data.

Sonic[edit]
Sonic, especially ultrasonic short-range communication involves the transmission and reception of sound.

Electromagnetic induction[edit]
Electromagnetic induction only allows short-range communication and power transmission. It has been used in biomedical situations such as pacemakers, as well as for short-range RFID tags.

Services[edit]
Common examples of wireless equipment include:[19]

Infrared and ultrasonic remote control devices
Professional LMR (Land Mobile Radio) and SMR (Specialized Mobile Radio) are typically used by business, industrial, and Public Safety entities.
Consumer Two-way radio including FRS Family Radio Service, GMRS (General Mobile Radio Service), and Citizens band ("CB") radios.
The Amateur Radio Service (Ham radio).
Consumer and professional Marine VHF radios.
Airband and radio navigation equipment used by aviators and air traffic control
Cellular telephones and pagers: provide connectivity for portable and mobile applications, both personal and business.
Global Positioning System (GPS): allows drivers of cars and trucks, captains of boats and ships, and pilots of aircraft to ascertain their location anywhere on earth.[20]
Cordless computer peripherals: the cordless mouse is a common example; wireless headphones, keyboards, and printers can also be linked to a computer via wireless using technology such as Wireless USB or Bluetooth.
Cordless telephone sets: these are limited-range devices, not to be confused with cell phones.
Satellite television: Is broadcast from satellites in geostationary orbit. Typical services use direct broadcast satellite to provide multiple television channels to viewers.
Electromagnetic spectrum[edit]
See also: Spectrum management
AM and FM radios and other electronic devices make use of the electromagnetic spectrum. The frequencies of the radio spectrum that are available for use for communication are treated as a public resource and are regulated by organizations such as the American Federal Communications Commission, Ofcom in the United Kingdom, the international ITU-R or the European ETSI. Their regulations determine which frequency ranges can be used for what purpose and by whom. In the absence of such control or alternative arrangements such as a privatized electromagnetic spectrum, chaos might result if, for example, airlines did not have specific frequencies to work under and an amateur radio operator was interfering with a pilot's ability to land an aircraft. Wireless communication spans the spectrum from 9 kHz to 300 GHz.[citation needed]

Applications[edit]
Mobile telephones[edit]
One of the best-known examples of wireless technology is the mobile phone, also known as a cellular phone, with more than 6.6 billion mobile cellular subscriptions worldwide as of the end of 2010.[21] These wireless phones use radio waves from signal-transmission towers to enable their users to make phone calls from many locations worldwide. They can be used within the range of the mobile telephone site used to house the equipment required to transmit and receive the radio signals from these instruments.[22]

Data communications[edit]
"Wireless Internet" redirects here. For all wireless Internet access, see Wireless broadband. For mobile wireless Internet, see Mobile broadband.
See also: Radio data communication
Wireless data communications allow wireless networking between desktop computers, laptops, tablet computers, cell phones, and other related devices. The various available technologies differ in local availability, coverage range, and performance,[23] and in some circumstances, users employ multiple connection types and switch between them using connection manager software[24][25] or a mobile VPN to handle the multiple connections as a secure, single virtual network.[26] Supporting technologies include:

Wi-Fi is a wireless local area network that enables portable computing devices to connect easily with other devices, peripherals, and the Internet.[citation needed] Standardized as IEEE 802.11 a, b, g, n, ac, ax, Wi-Fi has link speeds similar to older standards of wired Ethernet. Wi-Fi has become the de facto standard for access in private homes, within offices, and at public hotspots.[27] Some businesses charge customers a monthly fee for service, while others have begun offering it free in an effort to increase the sales of their goods.[28]
Cellular data service offers coverage within a range of 10-15 miles from the nearest cell site.[23] Speeds have increased as technologies have evolved, from earlier technologies such as GSM, CDMA and GPRS, through 3G, to 4G networks such as W-CDMA, EDGE or CDMA2000.[29][30] As of 2018, the proposed next generation is 5G.
Low-power wide-area networks (LPWAN) bridge the gap between Wi-Fi and Cellular for low-bitrate Internet of things (IoT) applications.
Mobile-satellite communications may be used where other wireless connections are unavailable, such as in largely rural areas[31] or remote locations.[23] Satellite communications are especially important for transportation, aviation, maritime and military use.[32]
Wireless sensor networks are responsible for sensing noise, interference, and activity in data collection networks. This allows us to detect relevant quantities, monitor and collect data, formulate clear user displays, and to perform decision-making functions[33]
Wireless data communications are used to span a distance beyond the capabilities of typical cabling in point-to-point communication and point-to-multipoint communication, to provide a backup communications link in case of normal network failure, to link portable or temporary workstations, to overcome situations where normal cabling is difficult or financially impractical, or to remotely connect mobile users or networks.

Peripherals[edit]
Peripheral devices in computing can also be connected wirelessly, as part of a Wi-Fi network or directly via an optical or radio-frequency (RF) peripheral interface. Originally these units used bulky, highly local transceivers to mediate between a computer and a keyboard and mouse; however, more recent generations have used smaller, higher-performance devices. Radio-frequency interfaces, such as Bluetooth or Wireless USB, provide greater ranges of efficient use, usually up to 10 feet, but distance, physical obstacles, competing signals, and even human bodies can all degrade the signal quality.[34] Concerns about the security of wireless keyboards arose at the end of 2007 when it was revealed that Microsoft's implementation of encryption in some of its 27 MHz models were highly insecure.[35]

Energy transfer[edit]
Main article: Wireless energy transfer
Wireless energy transfer is a process whereby electrical energy is transmitted from a power source to an electrical load that does not have a built-in power source, without the use of interconnecting wires. There are two different fundamental methods for wireless energy transfer. Energy can be transferred using either far-field methods that involve beaming power/lasers, radio or microwave transmissions, or near-field using electromagnetic induction.[36] Wireless energy transfer may be combined with wireless information transmission in what is known as Wireless Powered Communication.[37] In 2015, researchers at the University of Washington demonstrated far-field energy transfer using Wi-Fi signals to power cameras.[38]

Medical technologies[edit]
New wireless technologies, such as mobile body area networks (MBAN), have the capability to monitor blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen level, and body temperature. The MBAN works by sending low-powered wireless signals to receivers that feed into nursing stations or monitoring sites. This technology helps with the intentional and unintentional risk of infection or disconnection that arise from wired connections.[39]

Categories of implementations, devices, and standards[edit]

Cellular networks: 0G, 1G, 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G, 6G
Cordless telephony: DECT (Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications)
Land Mobile Radio or Professional Mobile Radio: TETRA, P25, OpenSky, EDACS, DMR, dPMR
List of emerging technologies
Radio station in accordance with ITU RR (article 1.61)
Radiocommunication service in accordance with ITU RR (article 1.19)
Radio communication system
Short-range point-to-point communication: Wireless microphones, Remote controls, IrDA, RFID (Radio Frequency Identification), TransferJet, Wireless USB, DSRC (Dedicated Short Range Communications), EnOcean, Near Field Communication
Wireless sensor networks: Zigbee, EnOcean; Personal area networks, Bluetooth, TransferJet, Ultra-wideband (UWB from WiMedia Alliance).
Wireless networks: Wireless LAN (WLAN), (IEEE 802.11 branded as Wi-Fi and HiperLAN), Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks (WMAN) and (LMDS, WiMAX, and HiperMAN)

See also[edit]

Comparison of wireless data standards
Digital radio
Hotspot (Wi-Fi)
ISO 15118 (Vehicle to Grid)
Li-Fi
MiFi
Mobile (disambiguation)
Radio antenna
Radio resource management (RRM)
Timeline of radio
Tuner (radio)
Wireless access point
Wireless security
Wireless Wide Area Network (True wireless)
WSSUS model

References[edit]


^ U.S. Army (1944). Technical Manual. US War Department. Retrieved 13 August 2022. In definitions given in the index, p. 162, the term "radio set" is listed as synonymous with the term "wireless set"

^ Paulu, Burton (1956). British Broadcasting: Radio and Television in the United Kingdom. U of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9781452909547. Retrieved 13 August 2022. (p.396) In a public opinion poll in Sweden in 1942, 31.4 percent answered 'Yes' to the question "Do you usually listen to the foreign news on the wireless?' {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)

^ "ATIS Telecom Glossary 2007". atis.org. Archived from the original on 2 March 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2008.

^ Franconi, Nicholas G.; Bunger, Andrew P.; Sejdić, Ervin; Mickle, Marlin H. (24 October 2014). "Wireless Communication in Oil and Gas Wells". Energy Technology. 2 (12): 996–1005. doi:10.1002/ente.201402067. ISSN 2194-4288. S2CID 111149917.

^ Biswas, S.; Tatchikou, R.; Dion, F. (January 2006). "Vehicle-to-vehicle wireless communication protocols for enhancing highway traffic safety". IEEE Communications Magazine. 44 (1): 74–82. doi:10.1109/mcom.2006.1580935. ISSN 0163-6804. S2CID 6076106.

^ Amédée Guillemin (1891). Electricity and Magnetism. Macmillan and Company. p. 31. Retrieved 17 April 2021.

^ Icons of Invention: The Makers of the Modern World from Gutenberg to Gates. ABC-CLIO. 2009. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-313-34743-6.

^ "Milestones: First Millimeter-wave Communication Experiments by J.C. Bose, 1894-96". List of IEEE milestones. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Retrieved 1 October 2019.

^ Emerson, D. T. (1997). "The work of Jagadis Chandra Bose: 100 years of mm-wave research". 1997 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest, Vol. 3. IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Research. Vol. 45, no. 12. pp. 2267–2273. Bibcode:1997imsd.conf..553E. doi:10.1109/MWSYM.1997.602853. ISBN 9780986488511. S2CID 9039614. reprinted in Igor Grigorov, Ed., Antentop, Vol. 2, No.3, pp. 87–96.

^ "Timeline". The Silicon Engine. Computer History Museum. Retrieved 22 August 2019.

^ "1901: Semiconductor Rectifiers Patented as "Cat's Whisker" Detectors". The Silicon Engine. Computer History Museum. Retrieved 23 August 2019.

^ a b c Golio, Mike; Golio, Janet (2018). RF and Microwave Passive and Active Technologies. CRC Press. pp. ix, I-1, 18–2. ISBN 9781420006728.

^ Rappaport, T. S. (November 1991). "The wireless revolution". IEEE Communications Magazine. 29 (11): 52–71. doi:10.1109/35.109666. S2CID 46573735.

^ "The wireless revolution". The Economist. 21 January 1999. Retrieved 12 September 2019.

^ a b c Baliga, B. Jayant (2005). Silicon RF Power MOSFETS. World Scientific. ISBN 9789812561213.

^ a b Harvey, Fiona (8 May 2003). "The Wireless Revolution". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 12 September 2019.

^ M. Uysal and H. Nouri, "Optical Wireless Communications – An Emerging Technology", 16th International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), Graz, Austria, July 2014

^ Ali Khalighi, Mohammad; Uysal, Murat (2014). "Survey on Free Space Optical Communication: A Communication Theory Perspective". IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 16 (4): 2231–2258. doi:10.1109/COMST.2014.2329501. S2CID 3141460.

^ Tech Target – Definition of Wireless – Posted by Margaret Rouse (2 April control and traffic control systems

^ Tsai, Allen. "AT&T Releases Navigator GPS Service with Speech Recognition". Telecom Industry News. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Retrieved 2 April 2008.

^ "Robust demand for mobile phone service will continue; UN agency predicts". UN News Centre. 15 February 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ Vilorio, Dennis. "You're a what? Tower Climber" (PDF). Occupational Outlook Quarterly. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 6 December 2013.

^ a b c "High Speed Internet on the Road". Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ "What is Connection Manager?". Microsoft Technet. 28 March 2003. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ "Our Products". Unwired Revolution. Archived from the original on 9 January 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ "General Dynamics- NetMotion Mobility XE". Archived from the original on 26 September 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2011.

^ "Wi-Fi". Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ O'Brien, J; Marakas, G.M (2008). Management Information Systems. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Irwin. p. 239.

^ Aravamudhan, Lachu; Faccin, Stefano; Mononen, Risto; Patil, Basavaraj; Saifullah, Yousuf; Sharma, Sarvesh; Sreemanthula, Srinivas (4 July 2003). "Getting to Know Wireless Networks and Technology". InformIT. Retrieved 12 July 2011.

^ "What really is a Third Generation (3G) Mobile Technology" (PDF). ITU. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 12 July 2011.

^ Geier, Jim (2008). "Wireless Network Industry Report 2007" (PDF). Wireless-Nets, Ltd. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ Ilcev, Stojce Dimov (2006). Global Mobile Satellite Communications for Maritime, Land and Aeronautical Applications. Springer. ISBN 9781402027840.

^ Lewis, F.L. (2004). "Wireless Sensor Networks." (PDF). Smart Environments: Technologies, Protocols, and Applications. New York: John Wiley. pp. 11–46. doi:10.1002/047168659X.ch2. ISBN 9780471686590.

^ Paventi, Jared (26 October 2013). "How does a Wireless Keyboard Work?". Ehow.

^ Moser, Max; Schrödel, Philipp (5 December 2007). "27Mhz Wireless Keyboard Analysis Report aka 'We know what you typed last summer'" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 6 February 2012.

^ Jones, George (14 September 2010). "Future Proof: How Wireless Energy Transfer Will Kill the Power Cable". MaximumPC.

^ Dusit Niyato; Lotfollah Shafai (2017). Wireless-Powered Communication Networks. Cambridge University Press. p. 329. ISBN 978-1-107-13569-7. Retrieved 17 April 2021.

^ "First Demonstration of a Surveillance Camera Powered by Ordinary Wi-Fi Broadcasts". MIT Technology Review. Retrieved 20 November 2020.

^ Linebaugh, Kate (23 May 2012). "More Hospital Medical Devices to Go Wireless". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 13 May 2022.


Further reading[edit]

Geier, Jim (2001). Wireless LANs. Sams. ISBN 0-672-32058-4.
Goldsmith, Andrea (2005). Wireless Communications. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-83716-2.
Larsson, Erik; Stoica, Petre (2003). Space-Time Block Coding For Wireless Communications. Cambridge University Press.
Molisch, Andreas (2005). Wireless Communications. Wiley-IEEE Press. ISBN 0-470-84888-X.
Pahlavan, Kaveh; Krishnamurthy, Prashant (2002). Principles of Wireless Networks – a Unified Approach. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-093003-2.
Pahlavan, Kaveh; Levesque, Allen H (1995). Wireless Information Networks. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-10607-0.
Rappaport, Theodore (2002). Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-042232-0.
Rhoton, John (2001). The Wireless Internet Explained. Digital Press. ISBN 1-55558-257-5.
Tse, David; Viswanath, Pramod (2005). Fundamentals of Wireless Communication. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-84527-0.

External links[edit]



Look up wireless in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Bibliography - History of wireless and radio broadcasting
 Nets, Webs and the Information Infrastructure at Wikibooks
Sir Jagadis Chandra Bose - The man who (almost) invented the radio
vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Phryctoria
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Donald Davies
Daniel Davis Jr.
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Lee de Forest
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Roberto Landell
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Internet pioneers
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Network switching
circuit
packet
Nodes
terminal
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
Global telecommunications regulation bodies

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

Authority control databases InternationalFASTNationalUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanIsrael




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wireless&oldid=1285958453"
Categories: WirelessHistory of radioTelevision terminologyHidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN dateArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse dmy dates from January 2023Articles with excerptsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021






 This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 21:05 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Wireless




























56 languages


Add topic
















