https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourne_shell




Bourne shell - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Origins








1.2
Features of the original version








1.3
Features introduced after 1979










2
Variants




Toggle Variants subsection





2.1
DMERT shell








2.2
Korn shell








2.3
Schily Bourne Shell










3
Relationship to other shells




Toggle Relationship to other shells subsection





3.1
C shell








3.2
Almquist shells








3.3
Other shells










4
See also








5
References








6
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Bourne shell



26 languages




AzərbaycancaБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어Italianoעברית日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaไทยУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Command-line interpreter for operating systems


Not to be confused with the Bourne-Again Shell.
Bourne shellBourne shell interaction on Version 7 UnixOriginal author(s)Stephen BourneDeveloper(s)Bell Telephone LaboratoriesInitial release1979; 46 years ago (1979)Operating systemUnixTypeUnix shellLicense[under discussion]
The Bourne shell (sh) is a shell command-line interpreter for computer operating systems. It first appeared on Version 7 Unix, as its default shell. Unix-like systems continue to have /bin/sh—which will be the Bourne shell, or a symbolic link or hard link to a compatible shell—even when other shells are used by most users.
The Bourne shell was once standard on all branded Unix systems, although historically BSD-based systems had many scripts written in csh. As the basis of POSIX sh syntax, Bourne shell scripts can typically be run with Bash or dash on Linux or other Unix-like systems; Bash itself is a free clone of Bourne.


History[edit]
Version 7 Unix: the original Bourne shell manual page. PDP-11 simulation with SIMH
Origins[edit]
Work on the Bourne shell initially started in 1976.[1] Developed by Stephen Bourne at Bell Labs, it was a replacement for the Thompson shell, whose executable file had the same name—sh. The Bourne shell was also preceded by the Mashey shell. Bourne was released in 1979 in the Version 7 Unix release distributed to colleges and universities. Although it is used as an interactive command interpreter, it was also intended as a scripting language and contains most of the features that are commonly considered to produce structured programs.
It gained popularity with the publication of The Unix Programming Environment by Brian Kernighan and Rob Pike—the first commercially published book that presented the shell as a programming language in a tutorial form.[citation needed]
Some of the primary goals of the shell were:[2]

To allow shell scripts to be used as filters.
To provide programmability including control flow and variables.
Control over all input/output file descriptors.
Control over signal handling within scripts.
No limits on string lengths when interpreting shell scripts.
Rationalize and generalize string quoting mechanism.
The environment mechanism. This allowed context to be established at startup and provided a way for shell scripts to pass context to sub scripts (processes) without having to use explicit positional parameters.
Features of the original version[edit]
Features of the Version 7 UNIX Bourne shell include:

Scripts can be invoked as commands by using their filename
May be used interactively or non-interactively
Allows both synchronous and asynchronous execution of commands
Supports input and output redirection and pipelines
Provides a set of built-in commands
Provides flow control constructs and quotation facilities.
Typeless variables
Provides local and global variable scope
Scripts do not require compilation before execution
Does not have a goto facility, so code restructuring may be necessary
Command substitution using backquotes: `command`.
Here documents using << to embed a block of input text within a script.
for ~ do ~ done loops, in particular the use of $* to loop over arguments, as well as for ~ in ~ do ~ done loops for iterating over lists.
case ~ in ~ esac selection mechanism, primarily intended to assist argument parsing.
sh provided support for environment variables using keyword parameters and exportable variables.
Contains strong provisions for controlling input and output and in its expression matching facilities.
The Bourne shell also was the first to feature the convention of using file descriptor 2> for error messages, allowing much greater programmatic control during scripting by keeping error messages separate from data.
Stephen Bourne's coding style was influenced by his experience with the ALGOL 68C compiler[3] that he had been working on at Cambridge University. In addition to the style in which the program was written, Bourne reused portions of ALGOL 68's if ~ then ~ elif ~ then ~ else ~ fi, case ~ in ~ esac and for/while ~ do ~ od" (using done instead of od) clauses in the common Unix Bourne shell syntax. Moreover, – although the v7 shell is written in C – Bourne took advantage of some macros[4] to give the C source code an ALGOL 68 flavor. These macros (along with the finger command distributed in Unix version 4.2BSD) inspired the International Obfuscated C Code Contest (IOCCC).[5]

Features introduced after 1979[edit]
Over the years, the Bourne shell was enhanced at AT&T. The various variants are thus called like the respective AT&T Unix version it was released with (some important variants being Version7, System III, SVR2, SVR3, SVR4). As the shell was never versioned, the only way to identify it was testing its features.[6]
Features of the Bourne shell versions since 1979 include:[7]

Built-in test command – System III shell (1981)
# as comment character – System III shell (1981)
Colon in parameter substitutions "${parameter:=word}" – System III shell (1981)
continue with argument – System III shell (1981)
cat <<-EOF for indented here documents – System III shell (1981)
Functions and the return builtin – SVR2 shell (1984)
Built-ins unset, echo, type – SVR2 shell (1984)
Source code de-ALGOL68-ized – SVR2 shell (1984)
Modern "$@" – SVR3 shell (1986)
Built-in getopts – SVR3 shell (1986)
Cleaned up parameter handling allows recursively callable functions – SVR3 shell (1986)
8-bit clean – SVR3 shell (1986)
Job control – SVR4 shell (1989)
Multi-byte support – SVR4 shell (1989)
Variants[edit]
DMERT shell[edit]
Duplex Multi-Environment Real-Time (DMERT) is a hybrid time-sharing/real-time operating system developed in the 1970s at Bell Labs Indian Hill location in Naperville, Illinois uses a 1978 snapshot of Bourne Shell "VERSION sys137 DATE 1978 Oct 12 22:39:57".[citation needed]  The DMERT shell runs on 3B21D computers still in use in the telecommunications industry.[citation needed]

Korn shell[edit]
Main article: Korn shell
Interaction with pdksh in OpenBSD (default shell)
The Korn shell (ksh) written by David Korn based on the original Bourne Shell source code,[8] was a middle road between the Bourne shell and the C shell. Its syntax was chiefly drawn from the Bourne shell, while its job control features resembled those of the C shell. The functionality of the original Korn Shell (known as ksh88 from the year of its introduction) was used as a basis for the POSIX shell standard. A newer version, ksh93, has been open source since 2000 and is used on some Linux distributions. A clone of ksh88 known as pdksh is the default shell in OpenBSD.

Schily Bourne Shell[edit]
Jörg Schilling's Schily-Tools includes three Bourne Shell derivatives.[9]

Relationship to other shells[edit]
C shell[edit]
Main article: C shell
Bill Joy, the author of the C shell, criticized the Bourne shell as being unfriendly for interactive use,[10] a task for which Stephen Bourne himself acknowledged C shell's superiority. Bourne stated, however, that his shell was superior for scripting and was available on any Unix system,[11] and Tom Christiansen also criticized C shell as being unsuitable for scripting and programming.[12]

Almquist shells[edit]
Main article: Almquist shell
Due to copyright issues surrounding the Bourne Shell as it was used in historic CSRG BSD releases, Kenneth Almquist developed a clone of the Bourne Shell, known by some as the Almquist shell and available under the BSD license, which is in use today on some BSD descendants and in low-memory situations. The Almquist Shell was ported to Linux, and the port renamed the Debian Almquist shell, or dash. This shell provides faster execution of standard sh (and POSIX-standard sh, in modern descendants) scripts with a smaller memory footprint than its counterpart, Bash. Its use tends to expose bashisms – bash-centric assumptions made in scripts meant to run on sh.

Other shells[edit]
Bash (the Bourne-Again shell) was developed in 1989 for the GNU project and incorporates features from the Bourne shell, csh, and ksh. It is meant to be POSIX-compliant.
rc was created at Bell Labs by Tom Duff as a replacement for sh for Version 10 Unix. It is the default shell for Plan 9 from Bell Labs. It has been ported to UNIX as part of Plan 9 from User Space.
Z shell, developed by Paul Falstad in 1990, is an extended Bourne shell with a large number of improvements, including some features of Bash, ksh, and tcsh.
See also[edit]
Comparison of command shells
Unix shell
References[edit]


^ https://www.bsdcan.org/2015/schedule/events/612.en.html Stephen Bourne Keynote for BSDCan 2015

^ "The A-Z of Programming Languages: Bourne shell, or sh". computerworld.com.au. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 6 March 2009.

^ McIlroy, M. D. (1987). A Research Unix reader: annotated excerpts from the Programmer's Manual, 1971–1986 (PDF) (Technical report). CSTR. Bell Labs. 139. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 May 2014.

^ Bourne, Steve (12 January 1979). "mac.h – Macros used by Bourne to structure C like Algol68C". AT&T Corporation. Retrieved 9 September 2006.

^ Landon Curt Noll; Simon Cooper; Peter Seebach & Leonid A. Broukhis (2004). "The IOCCC FAQ – Q/A: How did the IOCCC get started?". ioccc.org. Retrieved 9 September 2006.

^ "what shell is this". www.in-ulm.de.

^ "traditional Bourne shell family / history and development". www.in-ulm.de.

^ 
Korn, David G. (26 October 1994), "ksh - An Extensible High Level Language", Proceedings of the USENIX 1994 Very High Level Languages Symposium, USENIX Association, retrieved 5 February 2015, Instead of inventing a new script language, we built a form entry system by modifying the Bourne shell, adding built-in commands as necessary.

^ "Schily Bourne Shell - A modern enhanced and POSIX compliant Bourne Shell source maintained by Jörg Schilling". Schily-Tools. Archived from the original on 27 September 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2020.

^ An Introduction to the C shell Archived 13 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Bill Joy.[page needed]

^ Bourne, Stephen R. (October 1983). "The Unix Shell". BYTE. p. 187. Retrieved 30 January 2015.

^ Tom Christiansen (28 September 1995). "Csh Programming Considered Harmful". Retrieved 17 February 2014.


External links[edit]
This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this message)



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Bourne Shell Scripting

The individual members of "The Traditional Bourne Shell Family"
"Characteristical common properties of the traditional Bourne shells"
Historical C source code for the Bourne shell using mac.h macros from 1979
Original Bourne Shell documentation from 1978
A port of the "heirloom" SVR4 Bourne shell from OpenSolaris to some other Unix-like systems
Migrating from the System V (SVR4) Shell to the POSIX Shell
Bourne Shell Tutorial (syntax)
Faqs shell differences
Howard Dahdah, The A–Z of Programming Languages: Bourne shell, or sh – An in-depth interview with Steve Bourne, creator of the Bourne shell, or sh, Computerworld, 5 March 2009.
vteUnix shells
Almquist
Bash
Bourne
csh
fish
Hamilton
Korn
PowerShell
PWB
Qshell
rc
sash
tcsh
Thompson
Wish
Zsh

Comparison of command shells





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bourne_shell&oldid=1267941170"
Categories: Unix shells1979 softwarePOSIXScripting languagesText-oriented programming languagesUnix SUS2008 utilitiesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2017Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from July 2021All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2024Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2016






 This page was last edited on 7 January 2025, at 11:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Bourne shell




























26 languages


Add topic
















