https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ministry_of_Defence_(United_Kingdom)




Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom) - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Controversies








1.2
Fraud








1.3
Germ and chemical warfare tests








1.4
Civil action








1.5
Territorial Army cuts








1.6
Overspending








1.7
Hacking










2
Ministerial team








3
Senior military officials




Toggle Senior military officials subsection





3.1
Chiefs of the Defence Staff








3.2
Other senior military officers










4
Senior management








5
Defence policy








6
Governance and departmental organisation




Toggle Governance and departmental organisation subsection





6.1
Governance








6.2
Departmental organisation








6.3
Contracting










7
Property portfolio




Toggle Property portfolio subsection





7.1
Main Building










8
See also








9
References








10
Bibliography








11
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)



28 languages




العربيةBrezhonegČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


UK Government department responsible for defence
This article is about the department established in 1964. For the department from 1947 to 1964, see Ministry of Defence (1947–1964). For its headquarters, see Ministry of Defence Main Building.


Ministry of DefenceMoD Main Building, WestminsterDepartment overviewFormed1 April 1964 (as modern department)JurisdictionGovernment of the United KingdomHeadquartersMain Building, Whitehall, Westminster, London51°30′14″N 0°07′30″W﻿ / ﻿51.5040°N 0.1249°W﻿ / 51.5040; -0.1249Employees60,000 (FTE) civilian staff (April 2021)[1]198,940 military personnel[2]Annual budget£55 billion; FY 2021[3]Secretary of State responsibleJohn Healey MP, Secretary of State for DefenceDepartment executivesAdmiral Sir Tony Radakin, Chief of the Defence StaffDavid Williams, Permanent SecretaryChild agenciesDefence Equipment and SupportDefence Science and Technology LaboratoryUnited Kingdom Hydrographic OfficeWebsitegov.uk/mod 
The Ministry of Defence (MOD or MoD) is a ministerial department of the Government of the United Kingdom. It is responsible for implementing the defence policy set by the government and serves as the headquarters of the British Armed Forces.
The MOD states that its principal objectives are to defend the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and its interests and to strengthen international peace and stability.[4] The MOD also manages day-to-day running of the armed forces, contingency planning and defence procurement.
The expenditure, administration and policy of the MOD are scrutinised by the Defence Select Committee,[5] except for Defence Intelligence which instead falls under the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament.[6]


History[edit]
During the 1920s and 1930s, British civil servants and politicians, looking back at the performance of the state during World War I, concluded that there was a need for greater co-ordination between the three services that made up the armed forces of the United Kingdom: the Royal Navy, the British Army and the Royal Air Force. The formation of a united ministry of defence was rejected by the coalition government of David Lloyd George in 1921, but the Chiefs of Staff Committee was formed in 1923, for the purposes of inter-service co-ordination. As rearmament became a concern during the 1930s, Stanley Baldwin created the position of Minister for Co-ordination of Defence. Ernle Chatfield, 1st Baron Chatfield held the post until the fall of the Chamberlain government in 1940. His success was limited by his lack of control over the existing Service departments, and his lack of political influence.
On forming his government in 1940, Winston Churchill created the office of Minister of Defence, to exercise ministerial control over the Chiefs of Staff Committee and to co-ordinate defence matters. The post was held by the Prime Minister of the day until Clement Attlee's government introduced the Ministry of Defence Act of 1946. After 1946, the three posts of Secretary of State for War, First Lord of the Admiralty, and Secretary of State for Air were formally subordinated to the new Minister of Defence, who had a seat in the Cabinet. The three service ministers – Admiralty, War, Air – remained in direct operational control of their respective services, but ceased to attend Cabinet.
From 1946 to 1964, five Departments of State did the work of the modern Ministry of Defence: the Admiralty, the War Office, the Air Ministry, the Ministry of Aviation, and an earlier form of the Ministry of Defence. Those departments merged in 1964, and the defence functions of the Ministry of Aviation Supply were merged into the Ministry of Defence in 1971.[7] The unification of all defence activities under a single ministry was motivated by a desire to curb interservice rivalries and followed the precedent set by the American National Security Act of 1947.[8]

Controversies[edit]
Fraud[edit]
Main article: Gordon Foxley
The most notable fraud conviction has been that of Gordon Foxley, Director of Ammunition Procurement at the Ministry of Defence from 1981 to 1984. Police claimed he received at least £3.5m in total in corrupt payments, such as substantial bribes from overseas arms contractors aiming to influence the allocation of contracts.[9]

Germ and chemical warfare tests[edit]
A government report covered by The Guardian newspaper in 2002 indicated that between 1940 and 1979, the Ministry of Defence "turned large parts of the country into a giant laboratory to conduct a series of secret germ warfare tests on the public" and many of these tests "involved releasing potentially dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms over vast swathes of the population without the public being told."[10] The Ministry of Defence claims that these trials were to simulate germ warfare and that the tests were harmless. However, families who have been in the area of many of the tests are experiencing children with birth defects and physical and mental handicaps and many are asking for a public inquiry. The report estimated these tests affected millions of people, including during one period between 1961 and 1968 where "more than a million people along the south coast of England, from Torquay to the New Forest, were exposed to bacteria including E.coli and Bacillus globigii, which mimics anthrax." Two scientists commissioned by the Ministry of Defence stated that these trials posed no risk to the public. This was confirmed by Sue Ellison, a representative of the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory at Porton Down who said that the results from these trials "will save lives, should the country or our forces face an attack by chemical and biological weapons."

Civil action[edit]
In February 2019, former soldier Inoke Momonakaya won £458,000 payout after a legal battle for the racial harassment and bullying he received while serving in the army.[11] In August 2019, A Commons Defence Select Committee report revealed that several female and BAME military staff have raised concerns regarding discrimination, bullying and harassment.[12] In September 2019, two former British army soldiers Nkululeko Zulu and Hani Gue won a racial discrimination claim against the Ministry of Defence (MoD).[13] In November 2019, mixed race soldier Mark De Kretser sued MoD for £100k claiming he was subjected to "grindingly repetitive" racist taunts from colleagues.[14][15]

Territorial Army cuts[edit]
In October 2009, the MOD was heavily criticised for withdrawing the bi-annual non-operational training £20m budget for the Territorial Army (TA), ending all non-operational training for six months until April 2010. The government eventually backed down and restored the funding. The TA provides a small percentage of the UK's operational troops. Its members train on weekly evenings and monthly weekends, as well as two-week exercises generally annually and occasionally bi-annually for troops doing other courses. The cuts would have meant a significant loss of personnel and would have had adverse effects on recruitment.[16]

Overspending[edit]
In 2013, it was found that the Ministry of Defence had overspent on its equipment budget by £6.5bn on orders that could take up to 39 years to fulfil. The Ministry of Defence has been criticised in the past for poor management and financial control.[17]
Specific examples of overspending include:

Eight Boeing Chinook HC3 were ordered in 1995 as dedicated special forces helicopters.[18] The aircraft were to cost £259 million and the forecast in-service date was November 1998.[18] However, although delivered in 2001, the Mk3 could not receive airworthiness certificates as it was not possible to certify the avionics software, and would not enter service until 2017.[19][20] The procurement was described by Edward Leigh, then Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, as "one of the most incompetent procurements of all time" and the National Audit Office issued a scathing report on the affair, stating that the whole programme was likely to cost £500 million.[21][18]
In 2010, the Nimrod MRA4 maritime patrol aircraft procurement was cancelled after £3.4 billion had been spent on the programme. In addition there were termination costs which were not disclosed.[22] In January 2011 it was reported by the Financial Times that when the decision was taken to scrap the aircraft, "[it] was still riddled with flaws".[23]
Hacking[edit]
In May 2024, the ministry's payroll system was reportedly targeted multiple times in a cyberattack in which personnel and their bank details were compromised. While initial reports attributed the cyberattack to China, the Minister of Defence Grant Shapps said it would take some time to conclude who was to blame.[24][25]

Ministerial team[edit]
The Ministers in the Ministry of Defence are as follows, with cabinet ministers in bold:[26][27]



Minister

Portrait

Office

Portfolio


John Healey MP



Secretary of State for Defence

Overall responsibility for the department; strategic operations and operational strategy, including as a member of the National Security Council; defence planning, programme and resource allocation; strategic international partnerships: US, France, Germany, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, NATO; nuclear operations, policy and organisations; strategic communications.


Lord Coaker



Minister of State for Defence

Corporate governance including transformation programme; single departmental plan, risk reporting and health, safety and security; EU relations, including Brexit (excluding No Deal planning); engagement with retired senior Defence personnel and wider opinion formers; arms control and counter-proliferation, including strategic export licensing and chemical and biological weapons; UK Hydrographic Office; Statutory Instrument programme; Australia, Asia and Far East defence engagement; Defence Fire and Rescue; safety and security; Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland devolved authorities; ship wrecks, museums and heritage; Ministry of Defence Police; ministerial correspondence and PQs


Maria Eagle MP



Minister of State for Defence Procurement

Defence procurement; defence industrial strategy; economic growth and export campaigns; export licensing and controls; defence industry relationships; acquisition reform; equipment plan; defence estates; Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO); Defence Digital; science and technology; research and development; single source contract regulations; shipbuilding; multi-lateral capability programmes and organisations


Luke Pollard MP



Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces

Recruitment and readiness; Afghan resettlement and relocation; Ukraine support; Armed Forces Commissioner; climate change and sustainability; force generation, posture and deployment; global operational policy and commitments; crisis response; Permanent Joint Operating Bases; military aid to civilian authorities; national resilience; Armed Forces Parliamentary Scheme


Alistair Carns MP



Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Veterans and People

Veterans policy and delivery; civilian workforce; armed forces people policy; armed forces families; Office for Veterans Affairs (OVA); Veterans UK; Armed Forces Covenant; service resettlement; incentivisation; reserves and cadets; equality, diversity and inclusion; pensions and compensation; service charities; Service Justice System; legal

Senior military officials[edit]
Admiral Sir Tony Radakin, the Chief of the Defence Staff.
Defence chiefs at the Coronation of Charles III in 2023
Chiefs of the Defence Staff[edit]
The Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) is the professional head of the British Armed Forces and the most senior uniformed military adviser to the Secretary of State for Defence and the Prime Minister.
The CDS is supported by the Vice Chief of the Defence Staff (VCDS) who deputises and is responsible for the day-to-day running of the armed services aspect of the MOD through the Central Staff, working closely alongside the Permanent Secretary. They are joined by the professional heads of the three British armed services (Royal Navy, British Army and Royal Air Force) and the Commander of Strategic Command. All personnel sit at OF-9 rank in the NATO rank system.[28]
Together the Chiefs of Staff form the Chiefs of Staff Committee with responsibility for providing advice on operational military matters and the preparation and conduct of military operations.
The current Chiefs of Staff are as follows.[29]

Chief of the Defence Staff – Admiral Sir Tony Radakin
Vice-Chief of the Defence Staff – General Sharon Nesmith
First Sea Lord and Chief of the Naval Staff – Admiral Sir Ben Key (Head of the Royal Navy)
Chief of the General Staff – General Sir Roland Walker (Head of the British Army)
Chief of the Air Staff – Air Chief Marshal Sir Richard Knighton (Head of the Royal Air Force)
Commander Strategic Command – General Sir James Hockenhull (Head of Strategic Command)
Other senior military officers[edit]
The Chief of Defence Staff is supported by several Deputy Chiefs of the Defence Staff and senior officers at OF-8 rank.[28]

Chief of Defence People – Vice Admiral Phillip Hally
Deputy Chief of Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) – Air Marshal Harvey Smyth
Deputy Chief of Defence Staff (Financial and Military Capability) – Lieutenant General Sir Robert Magowan RM
Chief of Joint Operations – Lieutenant General Charles Stickland, based at Northwood Headquarters
Defence Senior Adviser Middle East – Air Marshal Martin Sampson
Chief of Defence Intelligence – Adrian Bird
Director-General of the Defence Safety Authority – Air Marshal Stephen Shell
Additionally, there are a number of Assistant Chiefs of Defence Staff, including the Defence Services Secretary in the Royal Household of the Sovereign of the United Kingdom, who is also the Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (Personnel).[30]

Senior management[edit]
Permanent Secretary and other senior officials
The Ministers and Chiefs of the Defence Staff are supported by several civilian, scientific and professional military advisors. The Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence (generally known as the Permanent Secretary) is the senior civil servant at the MOD. Their role is to ensure that it operates effectively as a government department and has responsibility for the strategy, performance, reform, organisation and the finances of the MOD.[31]
The role works closely with the Chief of the Defence Staff in leading the organisation and supporting Ministers in the conduct of business in the department across the full range of responsibilities.

Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence – David Williams
Second Permanent Secretary – Laurence Lee
Chief Operating Officer – Nina Cope
Director General Finance – Charlie Pate
Director General Nuclear – Vanessa Nicholls
Director General Security Policy – Dominic Wilson
Director General Commercial – Andrew Forzani
Director General Strategy and International – Angus Lapsley
MOD Chief Scientific Adviser – Dame Angela McLean
MOD Chief Scientific Adviser (Nuclear) – Professor Robin Grimes
Lead Non-Executive Board Member – Lord Grimstone
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Audit Committee – Simon Henry
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Equipment and Support Board – Paul Skinner
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the People Committee – Danuta Gray
Defence policy[edit]
See also: Foreign policy of the United Kingdom
The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 included £178 billion investment in new equipment and capabilities.[32][33] The review set a defence policy with four primary missions for the Armed Forces:[34]

Defend and contribute to the security and resilience of the UK and Overseas Territories.
Provide the nuclear deterrent.
Contribute to improved understanding of the world through strategic intelligence and the global defence network.
Reinforce international security and the collective capacity of our allies, partners and multilateral institutions.
The review stated the Armed Forces will also contribute to the government's response to crises by being prepared to:[34]

Support humanitarian assistance and disaster response, and conduct rescue missions.
Conduct strike operations.
Conduct operations to restore peace and stability.
Conduct major combat operations if required, including under NATO Article 5.
Governance and departmental organisation[edit]
A British armed forces careers office in Oxford
Governance[edit]
Defence is governed and managed by several committees.

The Defence Council provides the formal legal basis for the conduct of defence in the UK through a range of powers vested in it by statute and Letters Patent. It too is chaired by the Secretary of State, and its members are ministers, the senior officers and senior civilian officials.[35][36]
The Defence Board is the main MOD corporate board chaired by the Secretary of State oversees the strategic direction and oversight of defence, supported by an Investment Approvals Committee, Audit Committee and People Committee. The board's membership comprises the Secretary of State, the Armed Forces Minister, the Permanent Secretary, the Chief and Vice Chief of the Defence Staff, the Chief of Defence Materiel, Director General Finance and three non-executive board members.[35][36]
Head Office and Corporate Services (HOCS), which is made up of the Head Office and a range of corporate support functions. It has two joint heads the Chief of the Defence Staff and the Permanent Secretary who are the combined TLB holders for this unit they are responsible for directing the other TLB holders.[36][37]
Departmental organisation[edit]
The following organisational groups come under the control of the MOD.[38][39]
Top level budgets
The MOD comprises four top-level budgets. These are:[40]

Operations (Military Strategic Headquarters)
Readiness (Military Strategic Headquarters)
Investment (National Armaments Director)
Defence Nuclear Organisation
Executive agencies

Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S)
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl)
Submarine Delivery Agency (SDA)
UK Hydrographic Office (UKHO) – also has trading fund status.
Executive non-departmental public bodies

National Museum of the Royal Navy
National Army Museum
Royal Air Force Museum
Single Source Regulations Office (SSRO)
Advisory non-departmental public bodies

Advisory Committee on Conscientious Objectors
Advisory Group on Military Medicine
Armed Forces Pay Review Body
Defence Nuclear Safety Committee
Independent Medical Expert Group
National Employer Advisory Board
Nuclear Research Advisory Council
Scientific Advisory Committee on the Medical Implications of Less-Lethal Weapons
Veterans Advisory and Pensions Committees
Ad-hoc advisory group

Central Advisory Committee on Compensation
Other bodies

Commonwealth War Graves Commission
Defence Academy of the United Kingdom
Defence and Security Media Advisory Committee
Fleet Air Arm Museum
Independent monitoring board for the Military Corrective Training Centre (Colchester)
Reserve Forces' and Cadets' Associations
Royal Hospital Chelsea
Royal Marines Museum
Royal Navy Submarine Museum
Service Complaints Ombudsman
Service Prosecuting Authority
United Kingdom Reserve Forces Association
Public corporations

Oil and Pipelines Agency (OPA)
Sheffield Forgemasters
Enabling organisation

Defence Business Services (DBS)
In addition, the MOD is responsible for the administration of the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia in Cyprus.[41]

Contracting[edit]
Competitive procurement processes are used whenever possible,[42] and all new direct tender and contract opportunities valued over £10,000 are advertised on a system called the Defence Sourcing Portal. A separate internal policy generally operates in respect of low value purchasing below this threshold.[43]
DEFCON contract conditions are numbered defence contract conditions are in contracts issued by the MOD (not to be confused with DEFCON as used by the United States Armed Forces, which refers to a level of military "defence readiness condition").
Examples include:

DEFCON 534: Subcontracting and prompt payment
DEFCON 620: a change control procedure[44]
DEFCON 658 (cyber) applies to all suppliers down the supply chain[44]
DEFCON 659 relates to security measures for disclosure of "Secret Matters" including within the supply chain, requiring a contractor to ensure that employees "engaged on any work in connection with the Contract have notice that the Official Secrets Acts 1911–1989 apply to them and will continue so to apply after the completion or termination of the Contract", potentially also requiring employees to "sign a statement acknowledging that, both during the term of the Contract and after its completion or termination", they are bound by the Official Secrets Acts 1911–1989 (and where applicable by any other legislation).[45]
DEFCON 705: the MOD's standard IPR condition for fully funded research and technology contracts.
A full set of the DEFCONs can be accessed via the MoD's Defence Gateway (registration required).[46]
The government noted in 2013 that the MoD's third-party expenditure was characterised by "complex, high-value contracts". Defence purchasing contributes to government ambitions to make supply chains more accessible to small and medium-sized enterprises, but the government commented that it had yet to secure good insight into the supply chain role of SMEs.[47]

Property portfolio[edit]
The Ministry of Defence is one of the United Kingdom's largest landowners, owning 227,300 hectares of land and foreshore (either freehold or leasehold) at April 2014, which was valued at "about £20 billion". The MOD also has "rights of access" to a further 222,000 hectares. In total, this is about 1.8% of the UK land mass. The total annual cost to support the defence estate is "in excess of £3.3 billion".[48]
The defence estate is divided as training areas & ranges (84.0%), research & development (5.4%), airfields (3.4%), barracks & camps (2.5%), storage & supply depots (1.6%), and other (3.0%).[48] These are largely managed by the Defence Infrastructure Organisation.

Main Building[edit]
Main article: Ministry of Defence Main Building
The MOD Main Building, Whitehall, London
The headquarters of the MOD are in Whitehall and is known as MOD Main Building. This structure is neoclassical in style and was originally built between 1938 and 1959 to designs by Vincent Harris to house the Air Ministry and the Board of Trade. A major refurbishment of the building was completed under a Private Finance Initiative contract by Skanska in 2004.[49] The northern entrance in Horse Guards Avenue is flanked by two monumental statues, Earth and Water, by Charles Wheeler. Opposite stands the Gurkha Monument, sculpted by Philip Jackson and unveiled in 1997 by Queen Elizabeth II. Within it is the Victoria Cross and George Cross Memorial, and nearby are memorials to the Fleet Air Arm and RAF (to its east, facing the riverside).
Henry VIII's wine cellar at the Palace of Whitehall, built in 1514–1516 for Cardinal Wolsey, is in the basement of Main Building, and is used for entertainment.  The entire vaulted brick structure of the cellar was encased in steel and concrete and relocated nine feet to the west and nearly 19 feet (5.8 m) deeper in 1949, when construction was resumed at the site after World War II. This was carried out without any significant damage to the structure.[50]

See also[edit]
Defence Review – Process by which government of the United Kingdom decides upon its overall defence policy
Lancaster House Treaties – 2010 treaties between United Kingdom and France
Stabilisation Unit – Government unit in the United KingdomPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Budget of the United Kingdom – Balance sheet of the British government
UK National Defence Association – Pressure group supporting an increase in the UK's defence budget
References[edit]


^ "MOD biannual civilian personnel report: 2021". Retrieved 6 March 2022.

^ "UK Armed Forces Quarterly Service Personnel Statistics 1 October 2021". Retrieved 6 March 2022.

^ "Budget 2020". HM Treasury. Retrieved 12 March 2020.

^ "The Defence Vision, Ministry of Defence website". Retrieved 3 February 2021.

^ "Defence Committee". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021. The Defence Committee is appointed by the House of Commons to examine the expenditure, administration, and policy of the Ministry of Defence and its associated public bodies.

^ "Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament". gov.uk. Retrieved 29 December 2021. The ISC oversees the policies, expenditure, administration and operations of MI5, MI6, GCHQ, Defence Intelligence, the Joint Intelligence Organisation, the National Security Secretariat (NSS) and Homeland Security Group.

^ Ministry of Defence (10 December 2012). "History of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Defence website". Mod.uk. Retrieved 3 June 2013.

^ Hobkirk, Michael (1 September 1987). "Reform across the sea: A comparison of defence policy making in the UK and the USA". The RUSI Journal. 132 (3): 55–60. doi:10.1080/03071848708522824. ISSN 0307-1847.

^ "House of Commons Debates – Wednesday 16 Oct 1996 – Mr. Mike Hall (Warrington, South)". Hansard. Parliament of the United Kingdom. 16 October 1996. Retrieved 19 January 2008.

^ Antony Barnett (21 April 2002). "Millions were in germ war tests". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 August 2015.

^ Savike, Jessica (15 February 2019). "$1.3m settlement". FijiTimes. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ "Complaints by female and BAME military staff a 'serious concern'". BBC News. 7 August 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ "Paratroopers win Colchester barracks racial harassment claim". BBC News. 16 September 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ "Mixed-race Norfolk soldier labelled Apu and Dr Huxtable by 'racist' comrades, court hears". Eastern Daily Press. 6 November 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ "Army racism: 'People called me Apu'". BBC News. Retrieved 24 October 2023.

^ "Cuts force TA to cease training", BBC News, 10 October 2009

^ Bowden, David (10 January 2013). "MoD Overspends Equipment Budget By £6.5bn". Sky News.

^ a b c "Chinook blunder 'left RAF short'". BBC News. 7 April 2004.

^ UK signs deal to get grounded Chinook HC3 helicopters into service By Craig Hoyle 18 October 2007

^ Perry, Dominic (29 March 2017). "PICTURES: RAF welcomes updated Chinook HC5". /www.flightglobal.com. Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ Evans, Michael (4 June 2008). "£500m 'wasted' on Chinooks that have never flown". The Times. London.

^ "Ministry of Defence: The Major Projects Report 2011" (PDF). nao.org. National Audit Office. 16 November 2011. Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ "A failure of UK budget surveillance". Financial Times. London. 30 January 2011.

^ Bulter, Alexander (6 May 2024). "UK's MoD 'hacked by China'". The Independent. Retrieved 6 May 2024.

^ Sparrow, Andrew (7 May 2024). "Grant Shapps says it will 'take some time' to conclude who was to blame for cyber-attack on armed forces payroll – as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 May 2024.

^ "Her Majesty's Official Opposition". UK Parliament. Retrieved 17 October 2017.

^ "Our ministers". GOV.UK. Ministry of Defence. Retrieved 12 May 2015.

^ a b "Organogram – Ministry of Defence". data.gov.uk. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2017.

^ "Ministry of Defence – Our senior military officials". GOV.UK. Ministry of Defence. Retrieved 23 July 2018.

^ "Central Top Level Budget Organogram" (PDF). 30 June 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2021.

^ "Ministry of Defence – Our management". GOV.UK. Ministry of Defence. Retrieved 18 December 2017.

^ "PM pledges £178 billion investment in defence kit". Ministry of Defence. 23 November 2015. p. 27. Retrieved 23 November 2015.

^ "UK announces rapid strike forces, more warships in new defence plan". Reuters. 23 November 2015. Archived from the original on 24 November 2015. Retrieved 23 November 2015.

^ a b "National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015" (PDF). HM Government. November 2015. pp. 27, 29. Retrieved 23 November 2015.

^ a b "Our governance". GOV.UK. Ministry of Defence. Retrieved 23 August 2015.

^ a b c "A Short Guide to the Ministry of Defence" (PDF). nao.org.uk. National Audit Office UK. September 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "Head Office and Corporate Services Organogram". data.gov.uk. MOD UK. 30 September 2017. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "Departments, agencies and public bodies". GOV.UK. Retrieved 16 December 2017.

^ "A Short Guide to the Ministry of Defence" (PDF). National Audit Office. September 2017. p. 40. Retrieved 18 December 2017.

^ "Defence Secretary's speech on Defence Reform". 18 February 2025. Retrieved 1 April 2025.

^ Overseas Territories: The Ministry of Defence's Contribution (PDF). Ministry of Defence, Directorate-General Security Policy.

^ National Audit Office, Improving value for money in non-competitive procurement of defence equipment, published 25 October 2017, accessed 10 February 2023

^ Ministry of Defence, The Ministry of Defence Procurement process, updated 15 February 2021, accessed 10 February 2023

^ a b Ministry of Defence, Defence condition 658: cyber (flow-down), updated 10 September 2021, accessed 2 July 2022

^ Cabinet Office, Contractual Process, Appendix 1: DEFCON 659 Security Measures, Version 7.3, May 2018, accessed 2 July 2022

^ Ministry of Defence, Defence Gateway

^  This article incorporates text published under the British Open Government Licence: Cabinet Office, Making Government business more accessible to SMEs: Two Years On, published on 8 August 2013, accessed on 25 September 2024

^ a b "MOD land holdings bulletin: index". GOV.UK. Ministry of Defence. Retrieved 23 August 2015.

^ "Better Defence Builds Project Case Study" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 August 2009.

^ "The Old War Office Building; a History" (PDF). Retrieved 3 June 2013.


Bibliography[edit]
Chester, D. N and Willson, F. M. G. The Organisation of British Central Government 1914–1964: Chapters VI and X (2nd edition). London: George Allen & Unwin, 1968.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom).

Official website 
How Defence Works: the defence operating model 
vteMinistry of DefenceHeadquarters: Main Building, WhitehallArmed ForcesService branches
Naval Service
Royal Navy
Royal Marines
British Army
Royal Air Force
By nation
Scotland
Wales
the Irish
Defence CouncilPolitical
Secretary of State for Defence
Minister of State for the Armed Forces
Minister of State for Defence Procurement and Industry
Minister of State for Defence (House of Lords)
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Veterans and People
Military
Chief of the Defence Staff
Vice-Chief of the Defence Staff
First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff
Chief of the General Staff
Chief of the Air Staff
Commander Strategic Command
Chief of Defence People
Civil Service
Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence
Chief Scientific Adviser
Director-General Finance
Director-General Head Office and Commissioning Services
Director-General Nuclear
Director-General Security Policy
Lead Non-Executive Board Member
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the People Committee
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Audit Committee
Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Equipment and Support Board
Service boards
Admiralty Board (Navy Board)
Army Board
Air Force Board
Service commands
Navy Command
Army Command
 Air Command
Strategic Command
Arm's-length bodies
Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S)
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL)
Submarine Delivery Agency (SDA)
United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO)
Top-level budget agenciesmanaged on an arm's-length basis
Defence Business Services (DBS)
Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO)
Defence Digital
Defence Nuclear Organisation
Ministry of Defence Police
Regulatory organisations
Defence Safety Authority
Single Source Regulations Office
Intelligence
Defence Intelligence (under Strategic Command)
Defence Secretariat 19 (defunct)
Non-departmentalpublic bodies
National Army Museum
National Museum of the Royal Navy
Royal Air Force Museum
Public corporations
Oil and Pipelines Agency (OPA)
Sheffield Forgemasters
 Category
vteDepartments of the Government of the United KingdomMinisterial
Advocate General for Scotland
Attorney General's Office
Business and Trade
Cabinet Office
Culture, Media and Sport
Defence
Education
Energy Security and Net Zero
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Health and Social Care
Home
Housing, Communities and Local Government
Justice
Leader of the House of Commons
Leader of the House of Lords
Northern Ireland
Science, Innovation and Technology
Scotland
Transport
Treasury
UK Export Finance
Wales
Work and Pensions
Non-ministerial
Charity Commission for England and Wales
Competition and Markets Authority
Crown Prosecution Service
Food Standards Agency
Forestry Commission
Government Actuary's Department
Government Legal Department
HM Land Registry
HM Revenue and Customs
National Crime Agency
National Savings and Investments
Office of Rail and Road
Ofgem
Ofqual
Ofsted
Ofwat
Serious Fraud Office
Supreme Court
The National Archives
UK Statistics Authority

Authority control databases InternationalISNIPeopleUK Parliament




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ministry_of_Defence_(United_Kingdom)&oldid=1284374295"
Categories: Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)Ministerial departments of the Government of the United Kingdom1964 establishments in the United KingdomDefence ministriesMinistries established in 1964Military of the United KingdomMilitary units and formations established in 1964Veterans' affairs ministriesBritish landownersNATO defence ministriesHidden categories: Open Government Licence attributionArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from July 2024Use British English from October 2013Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlasPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated linkCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 05:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)




























28 languages


Add topic
















