https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_DOI_inactive_as_of_December_2024




Category:CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2024 - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk



























Category:CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2024



1 language




Русский

Edit links











CategoryTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide









Help

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


This category is not shown on its member pages unless the appropriate user preference (appearance → show hidden categories) is set.
This category lists pages that have cs1|2 templates that use |doi=, where a digital object identifier doi value has been specified but then recognized as inactive. These are collected in Category:CS1 maint: DOI inactive.
This may represent:

An incorrectly specified DOI.  In this case, the DOI in question should be corrected.
A DOI awaiting entry into the Handle System system.  In this case, the DOI will soon be active, and a bot will remove the doi-broken-date parameter next time it checks the transcluding article.  The article will be correctly listed in this category but does not require further editing until the DOI becomes active.
A system error with the DOI resolving agency.  This should be reported to the DOI resolver (e.g. Crossref) so that it can be fixed - preferably including a link to the journal article claiming the link as further information.
Publisher issues.  A new publisher may have taken over a journal, or a publisher may not yet support DOIs, despite assigning them.  In this case, the DOI may not produce a usable hyperlink but still serves as a permanent identifier for the article in question.  It should be marked using the |doi-broken-date= parameter of {{cite xxx}}.  The article will then be correctly listed in this category until the DOI becomes active.  The DOI error report method might not work for these, since the publisher and the DOI owner are not the same.
The DOI has changed, such as the Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine which changed its DOIs when it changed publishers.
Internal use only DOI.  The American Medical Association, for example, assigns a DOI to all of its journal articles, but many of these are only in the META tags on the web pages and Crossref will not resolve these.  Since these can be found with an Internet search engine and might eventually resolve they should be left in the citation.
The DOI resolves to a dead link.  These are hard to report, since the doi.org thinks the DOI works and sometimes the journal no longer exists.

Pages in this category should only be added by Module:Citation/CS1.


By default, Citation Style 1 and Citation Style 2 error messages are visible to all readers and maintenance messages are hidden from all readers.
To display maintenance messages in the rendered article, include the following text in your common CSS page (common.css) or your specific skin's CSS page and (skin.css).
(Note to new editors: those CSS pages are specific to you, and control your view of pages, by adding to your user account's CSS code. If you have not yet created such a page, then clicking one of the .css links above will yield a page that starts "Wikipedia does not have a user page with this exact name." Click the "Start the User:username/filename page" link, paste the text below, save the page, follow the instructions at the bottom of the new page on bypassing your browser's cache, and finally, in order to see the previously hidden maintenance messages, refresh the page you were editing earlier.)

:root .mw-parser-output .cs1-maint {display: inline;} /* display Citation Style 1 maintenance messages */

To display hidden-by-default error messages:

:root .mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error {display: inline;} /* display hidden Citation Style 1 error messages */

Even with this CSS installed, older pages in Wikipedia's cache may not have been updated to show these error messages even though the page is listed in one of the tracking categories. A null edit will resolve that issue.
After (error and/maintenance) messages are displayed, it might still not be easy to find them in a large article with a lot of citations. Messages can then be found by searching (with Ctrl-F) for "(help)" or "cs1".
To hide normally-displayed error messages:

:root .mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error {display: none;} /* hide Citation Style 1 error messages */

You can personalize the display of these messages (such as changing the color), but you will need to ask someone who knows CSS or at the technical village pump if you do not understand how.
Nota bene: these CSS rules are not obeyed by Navigation popups. They also do not hide script warning messages in the Preview box that begin with "This is only a preview; your changes have not yet been saved".


Contents 

Top
0–9
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z





Pages in category "CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2024"
The following 200 pages are in this category, out of approximately 724 total. This list may not reflect recent changes.
(previous page) (next page)0–9
3C 75
19th-century London
22.2 surround sound
625 lines
1140s
1142
1784 Peru earthquake
1822 Costa Rica earthquake
1931 Barcelona rent strike
1936 Lingshan earthquake
2012 in archosaur paleontology
2015 in paleoentomology
2017 in paleomalacology
2018 in paleontology
2021 in paleomammalogy
2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai eruption and tsunami
2022 in archosaur paleontology
2024 in arthropod paleontologyA
Abiogenesis
Abortion debate
Abraha
Abuse defense
Daron Acemoglu
Acetyl-CoA
Acne
Active power filter
Adenosine A2A receptor
Advertising to children
Aethia
African art
Aftermarket (merchandise)
Agricultural subsidy
Agriculture in California
Aid effectiveness
Ajam of Bahrain
Albanian paganism
Aldosterone synthase
Alexios V of Trebizond
Algodoo
Alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein
Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase
Alpine chough
Altaic languages
Alysicarpus glumaceus
Ambush predator
American Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine
American mink
Ancient DNA
Angiolymphoid hyperplasia with eosinophilia
Anoxic event
Anti-predator adaptation
Antipsychotic
Peter L. Antonelli
APU International School
Archaeology
Aristaless related homeobox
Arithmetic
Aromatase
Arsenic poisoning
Arthashastra
Artificial intelligence in healthcare
Artificial organ
Asemonea virgea
Asherah
Martin Asplund
Asunción arch
Asynchronous circuit
Asynchronous communication mechanism
Atherosclerosis
Atracurium besilate
Audience cost
Austronesian languages
Automation
AvobenzoneB
Babalon
Balanced Boolean function
Ball bearing motor
Bankside Power Station
BAPS Charities
Bark (botany)
Simon Baron-Cohen
Iann Barron
Bashplemi lake tablet
Basidiolichen
Battle of Abinsk
Beaked whale
Behaviorism
Rayleigh–Bénard convection
James Benford
Désirée Bernard
Bestiality with a donkey
Maamar Bettayeb
Bence Bicsák
August Bier
Roy Billinton
Biomass to liquid
Biophoton
Bistability
Black tar heroin
Blanchard's transsexualism typology
Bolax gummifera
Boltzmann sampler
Booksellers' Bill
Border
British Rail Class 91
David Broomhead
Brushed DC electric motor
ButagestC
Cairo Metro
Cairo Metro Line 2
Calcium chloride
Calumniated Wife
Donald Angus Cameron of Lochiel
Candlepower
Cape Town
Caprella mutica
Carcinogenesis
Castilian Spanish
Catnip
Central processing unit
Central Valley groundwater pollution
Ceropegia anjanerica
British Ceylon
Chalan Piao, Saipan
Le Chambon-sur-Lignon
Changeable hawk-eagle
Chen–Ho encoding
V. Gordon Childe
Norma Chinchilla
Chinese online literature
Chipless RFID
Chloride channel opener
Chough
Christian Social Union in Bavaria
Christianity in Syria
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Robert Churchhouse
Cinema of the Soviet Union
City of London Electric Lighting Company
Civil death
CLCNKB
Cleanroom
Clear-Vision
Climate change and fisheries
Climate change in Nigeria
Clown
Cockatoo
Coleoptera paleobiota of Burmese amber
Collartida
Asha Collins
Colostrum
Communication privacy management theory
Computer
Computer security incident management
Edward Conard
Conodont
Consumerism
Contact guidance
Contactin 6
Ted Cooke-Yarborough
Cooperative learning
Coral
Coral reef
Coronavirus diseases
Coupling coefficient of resonators
Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever
Crisis intervention
Aleister Crowley
Crown group
Cryoablation
CSDA (gene)
Curculio sayi
Cyclone
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulatorD
Dabigatran
Heather Dale
Dansgaard–Oeschger event
Georges Jean Marie Darrieus
Data analysis
Data sovereignty
Davao Gulf
Donald Davies
Siwan Davies
Deacetoxycephalosporin-C synthase
Decision boundary
Deductive reasoning
Dementia
Democratic Party (Indonesia)
Demographics of Italy
Densely packed decimal
Depleted uranium
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
Desorptive capacity
DGCR14
Dialectical behavior therapy
Sandra Díaz (ecologist)
Dictionary of Occult, Hermetic and Alchemical Sigils
Numerical relay
Digital repatriation
Digitoxin(previous page) (next page)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category:CS1_maint:_DOI_inactive_as_of_December_2024&oldid=1260557945"
Hidden categories: Hidden categoriesTemplate Category TOC via Automatic category TOC on category with 601–900 pagesAutomatic category TOC generates standard Category TOCCS1 maint: DOI inactive






 This page was last edited on 1 December 2024, at 12:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search





Category:CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2024




























1 language


Add topic















