https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_controller




Game controller - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Variants




Toggle Variants subsection





2.1
Gamepad








2.2
Paddle








2.3
Joystick








2.4
Trackball








2.5
Throttle quadrant








2.6
Steering wheel








2.7
Yoke








2.8
Pedals








2.9
Mouse and keyboard








2.10
Touchscreen








2.11
Motion sensing








2.12
Adaptive controllers








2.13
Light gun








2.14
Rhythm game controllers








2.15
Wireless








2.16
Others










3
Use on PCs and other devices








4
See also








5
References








6
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Game controller



30 languages




العربيةDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიLietuviųBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаاردو吴语粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Device used with games or entertainment systems
A player holding a North American Super Nintendo Entertainment System controller
A game controller, gaming controller, or simply controller, is an input device or input/output device used with video games or entertainment systems to provide input to a video game. Input devices that have been classified as game controllers include keyboards, mice, gamepads, and joysticks, as well as special purpose devices, such as steering wheels for driving games and light guns for shooting games. Controllers designs have evolved to include directional pads, multiple buttons, analog sticks, joysticks, motion detection, touch screens and a plethora of other features.
Game controllers may be input devices that only provide input to the system, or input/output devices that receive data from the system and produce a response (e.g. "rumble" vibration feedback, or sound).
Controllers which are included with the purchase of a home console are referred to as standard controllers, while those that are available to purchase from the console manufacturer or third-party offerings are considered peripheral controllers.[1]


History[edit]
A modern recreation of the controller for the 1958 video game Tennis For Two
One of the first video game controllers was a simple dial and single button, used to control the game Tennis for Two. Controllers have since evolved to include directional pads, multiple buttons, analog sticks, joysticks, motion detection, touch screens and a plethora of other features.
Game controllers have been designed and improved over the years to be as user friendly as possible. The Microsoft Xbox controller, with its shoulder triggers that mimic actual triggers such as those found on guns, has become popular for shooting games.[2]
Before the seventh generation of video game consoles, plugging in a controller into one of a console's controller ports was the primary means of using a game controller, although since then they have been replaced by wireless controllers, which do not require controller ports on the console but are battery-powered. USB game controllers could also be connected to a computer with a USB port.

Variants[edit]
Input devices that have been classified as game controllers include keyboards, mouses, gamepads, and joysticks. Special purpose devices, such as steering wheels for driving games and light guns for shooting games, are also game controllers. Some controllers are designed to be best for one type of game, such as steering wheels for driving games, or dance pads for dancing games.

Gamepad[edit]
Main article: Gamepad
A Nintendo Switch Pro Controller, a typical modern two-stick gamepad
A gamepad, also known as a joypad, is held in both hands with thumbs and fingers used to provide input. Gamepads can have a number of action buttons combined with one or more omnidirectional control sticks or buttons. Action buttons are generally handled with the digits on the right hand, and the directional input handled with the left. Gamepads are the primary means of input on most modern video game consoles. Due to the ease of use and user-friendly nature of gamepads, they have spread from their origin on traditional consoles to personal computers, where a variety of games and emulators support their input as a replacement for keyboard and mouse input.[3] Most modern game controllers are a variation of a standard gamepad. Common additions include shoulder buttons placed along the edges of the pad, centrally placed buttons labeled start, select, and mode, and an internal motor to provide haptic feedback.
As modern game controllers advance, so too do their user ability qualities. Typically, the controllers become smaller and more compact to more easily, and comfortably, fit within the user's hand. Modern examples can be drawn from systems such as the first Xbox console, whose controller has changed in a variety of ways from the original Xbox 360 controller to the Xbox One controller introduced in 2013.

Paddle[edit]
Main article: Paddle (game controller)
Paddle controllers were popular early in the 2nd console generation for Pong games.
A paddle is a controller that features a round wheel and one or more fire buttons. The wheel is typically used to control movement of the player or of an object along one axis of the video screen. As the user turns the wheel further from the default position, the speed of control in the game become more intensive.
Paddle controllers were the first analog controllers and they lost popularity when "paddle and ball" type games fell out of favor. A variation, the Atari driving controller, appeared on the Atari 2600. Designed specifically for the game Indy 500, it functioned almost identically in operation and design to the regular paddle controller. The exceptions were that its wheel could be continuously rotated in either direction, and that it was missing the extra paddle included on the previous model. Unlike a spinner, friction prevented the wheel from gaining momentum.

Joystick[edit]
Main article: Joystick
A dual-joystick controller for the original PlayStation An arcade style controller for the Sega Dreamcast
A joystick is a peripheral that consists of a handheld stick that can be tilted around either of two axes and (sometimes) twisted around a third. The joystick is often used for flight simulators. HOTAS (hands on throttle and stick) controllers, composed of a joystick and throttle quadrant (see below) are a popular combination for flight simulation among its most fanatic devotees.
Most joysticks are designed to be operated with the user's primary hand (e.g. with the right hand of a right-handed person), with the base either held in the opposite hand or mounted on a desk. Arcade controllers are typically joysticks featuring a shaft that has a ball or drop-shaped handle, and one or more buttons for in game actions. Generally the layout has the joystick on the left, and the buttons on the right, although there are instances when this is reversed.

Trackball[edit]
Main article: Trackball
A trackball is a smooth sphere that is manipulated with the palm of one's hand. The user can roll the ball in any direction to control the cursor. It has the advantage that it can be faster than a mouse depending on the speed of rotation of the physical ball. Another advantage is that it requires less space than a mouse, which the trackball was a precursor of. Notable uses of a Trackball as a gaming controller would be games such as Centipede, Marble Madness, Golden Tee Golf and SegaSonic the Hedgehog.

Throttle quadrant[edit]
A throttle quadrant is a set of one or more throttle levers that are most often used to simulate throttles or other similar controls in a real vehicle, particularly an aircraft. Throttle quadrants are most popular in conjunction with joysticks or yokes used in flight simulation.

Steering wheel[edit]
Main article: Racing wheel
A Logitech steering wheel for the PlayStation 2
A racing wheel, essentially a larger version of a paddle, is used in most racing arcade games as well as more recent racing simulators such as Live for Speed, Grand Prix Legends, GTR2, and Richard Burns Rally. While most arcade racing games have been using steering wheels since Gran Trak 10 in 1974,[4] steering wheels for home systems appeared on fifth-generation consoles such as the PlayStation and Nintendo 64. Many are force feedback (see Force Feedback Wheel), designed to give the same feedback as would be experienced when driving a real car, but the realism of this depends on the game. They usually come with pedals to control the gas and brake. Shifting is taken care of in various ways including paddle shifting systems, simple stick shifters which are moved forward or back to change gears or more complex shifters which mimic those of real vehicles, which may also use a clutch. Some wheels turn only 200 to 270 degrees lock-to-lock but higher-tier models can turn 900 degrees, or 2.5 turns, lock-to-lock, or more. The Namco Jogcon paddle was available for the PlayStation game R4: Ridge Racer Type 4. Unlike "real" video game steering wheels, the Jogcon was designed to fit in the player's hand. Its much smaller wheel (diameter roughly similar to a soda can's) resembles the jog-and-shuttle control wheel used on some VCRs. The Wii game Mario Kart Wii is bundled with the Wii Wheel: a steering wheel-shaped shell that the Wii Remote is placed inside thus using the Wii Remote's motion sensing capabilities to control the kart during the game. Hori also has a steering wheel that is made for the Nintendo 3DS game Mario Kart 7. When the steering wheel is placed on the back of the console, then it will have the same ability as in Mario Kart Wii by using the gyroscope in first-person mode.

Yoke[edit]
A yoke is very similar to a steering wheel except that it resembles the control yoke found on many aircraft and has two axes of movement: not only rotational movement about the shaft of the yoke, but also a forward-and-backward axis equivalent to that of pitch control on the yoke of an aircraft. Some yokes have additional controls attached directly to the yoke for simulation of aircraft functions such as radio push-to-talk buttons. Some flight simulator sets that include yokes also come with various other aircraft controls such as throttle quadrants and pedals.[5] These sets, including the yoke, are intended to be used in a flight simulator.

Pedals[edit]
Main article: Simulator pedal
A Logitech Driving Force GT combo of a sim steering wheel and pedals (2011)
Pedals may be used for driving simulations or flight simulations and often ships with a steering-wheel-type input device.[6] In the former case, an asymmetric set of pedals can simulate accelerator, brake, and clutch pedals in a real automobile. In the latter case, a symmetric set of pedals simulates rudder controls and toe brakes in an aircraft. As mentioned, most steering wheel controllers come with a set of pedals. There are also variations of the pedal controller such as the proposed rotating pedal device for a cycling game, which relies on an ergometer to generate user inputs such as pedal rpm and pedal resistance.[7] A variation of this concept surfaced in 2016 when a startup called VirZoom debuted a set of sensors that can be installed in the pedal and handlebars, turning a physical bike into one controller for games on the HTC Vive and Oculus Rift virtual reality (VR) platforms.[8] The same concept is behind a product called Cyber ExerCycle,[9] which is a set of sensors attached to the pedal and connected to the PC via USB for bicycle simulation games such as NetAthlon and Fuel.

The WASD keyboard setup is used widely, but by no means universally.
Mouse and keyboard[edit]
A mouse and computer keyboard are typical input devices for a personal computer and are currently the main game controllers for computer games. The mouse is often used with a mousepad to achieve greater speed, comfort, accuracy and smoother movement for the gamer. Some video game consoles also have the ability to function with a keyboard and a mouse. The computer keyboard is modelled after the typewriter keyboard and was designed for the input of written text. A mouse is a handheld pointing device used in addition to the keyboard. For games, the keyboard typically controls movement of the character while the mouse is used to control the game camera or used for aiming. While originally designed for general computer input, there are several keyboard and mouse peripherals available which are designed specifically for gaming, often with gaming-specific functions built-in. Examples include peripherals by Razer, the "Zboard" range of keyboards and Logitech's 'G' series. The numeric keypad found on the keyboard is also used as a game controller and can be found on a number of separate devices, most notably early consoles, usually attached to a joystick or a paddle. The keypad is a small grid of keys with at least the digits 0–9. A Gaming keypad is a specialized controller used for FPSs, RTSs and some arcade type games. These controllers can be programmed to allow the emulation of keys, and macros in some cases. These generally resemble a small part of a keyboard but may also feature other inputs such as analog sticks. They were developed because some of these games require a keyboard to play, and some players find this to be awkward for such a task. The mouse and keyboard input is also known by the abbreviation "MnK".[10]

Touchscreen[edit]
Nintendo DS touchscreen (bottom) with stylusA touchscreen is an input device that allows the user to interact with the computer by touching the display screen. The first attempt at a handheld game console with touchscreen controls was Sega's intended successor to the Game Gear, though the device was ultimately shelved and never released due to the high cost of touchscreen technology in the early 1990s.[11] The first released console to use a touchscreen was the Tiger game.com in 1997. Nintendo popularized it for use in video games with the Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS; other systems including the Tapwave Zodiac as well as Smartphones and the vast majority of PDAs have also included this feature. The primary controller for Nintendo's Wii U console, the Wii U GamePad, features an embedded touchscreen. Modern touch screens use a thin, durable, transparent plastic sheet overlaid onto a glass screen. The location of a touch is calculated from the capacitance for the X and Y axes, which varies based upon where the sheet is touched. One console that is touchscreen developed by Sony is the PlayStation Vita which has a 5-inch OLED touchscreen. The Nintendo Switch features a 6.2 inch touchscreen.
Motion sensing[edit]
Wii Remote
Motion controllers include the Sega Activator, released in 1993 for the Mega Drive (Genesis). Based on the Light Harp invented by Assaf Gurner,[12] it could read the player's physical movements and was the first controller to allow full-body motion sensing. However, it was a commercial failure due to its "unwieldiness and inaccuracy".[13] Nintendo's Wii system released in 2006 utilizes the Wii Remote controller, which uses accelerometers to detect its approximate orientation and acceleration and an image sensor,[14] so it can be used as a pointing device. The Sixaxis, DualShock 3, and PlayStation Move controllers for Sony's PlayStation 3 system have similar motion sensing capabilities. In 2010, Microsoft released the Kinect for the Xbox 360. This motion sensing controller uses cameras to track a player’s movement. Microsoft released a revised version of the Kinect with the launch of the Xbox One. This controller was bundled with the console on launch, and was removed from the default bundle in June 2014. Sony's EyeToy similarly uses cameras to detect the player's motions and translate them into inputs for the game. Controllers with gyroscopes may be used to create a pointer without a camera; for example the Joy-Con and Nintendo Switch Pro Controller are used for this in games such as ports of World of Goo and Super Mario Galaxy from the Wii.[15][16]

Adaptive controllers[edit]
An adaptive controller is collections of various input methods that can be combined in multiple ways to create a controller that works for the user. The adaptive controller was designed for people with physical disabilities that would prevent them from using a gamepad or mouse and keyboard. An example would be PlayStation's access controller which allows for a large joystick, eight buttons on a circular pad, and four ports to plug in additional buttons or accessories.[17] Xbox and Logitech have collaborated to make an adaptive controller with two large touch pads, a D-pad, three buttons, and 16 ports to plug in additional accessories. These accessories can include joysticks, pedals, triggers and buttons.[18]

Light gun[edit]
Main article: Light gun
NES Zapper
A light gun is a peripheral used to "shoot" targets on a screen. They usually roughly resemble firearms or ray guns. Their use is normally limited to rail shooters, or shooting gallery games like Duck Hunt and those which came with the Shooting Gallery light gun. A rare example of a non-rail first person shooter game is Taito's 1992 video game Gun Buster, a first-person shooter that used a joystick to move and a light gun to aim.[19] Though light guns have been used in earlier arcade games such as Sega's Periscope in 1966[20] and Missile in 1969,[21] the first home console light gun was released for the Magnavox Odyssey in 1972; later on, Nintendo would include one standard on their Famicom and NES, called the NES Zapper. Nintendo has also released a "shell" in the style of a light gun for the more recent Wii Remote called the Wii Zapper which comes bundled with the game Link's Crossbow Training.

Rhythm game controllers[edit]
Guitar controllers
Rhythm game accessories used for rhythm games can resemble musical instruments, such as guitars (from multi-button guitars in Guitar Freaks, the Guitar Hero series, and the Rock Band series to real guitars in Rock Band 3 and Rocksmith), keyboards (Rock Band 3), drums (Donkey Konga, Drum Mania, the Rock Band series and the Guitar Hero series), or maracas (Samba de Amigo) have also seen some success in arcades and home consoles. Other rhythm games are based around the art of Djing or turntablism (DJ Hero), or playing a synthesizer (IIDX) using a turntable shaped peripheral with buttons.

Wireless[edit]
Wireless versions of many popular controller types (joypads, mice, keyboards) exist, and wireless motion controls are an emerging class for virtual reality.

Others[edit]
Balance board: The Wii Balance Board comes with the game Wii Fit. This was preceded by decades by the Joyboard, made to plug into an Atari 2600, to play skiing and surfing games.
Breathing controllers help their users improve breathing through video games. All controllers have sensors that sense users breath, with which user controls video game on computer, tablet or on smartphone. Alvio is a breathing trainer, symptom tracker and mobile game controller.[22] Zenytime promotes deep, rhythmic breathing to trigger short-term rewards of controlled breathing (relaxation, improved oxygenation...).[23] Breathing games by Breathing Labs are based on Pursed lip breathing and are used on iPhone / iPad, Windows, macOS and Android devices.[24]
Buzzers: A recent example of specialized, while very simple, game controllers, is the four large "buzzers" (round buttons) supplied with the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation 3 quiz show game series Buzz! (2005–present); both game and controllers clearly being inspired by the television show genre. Another example is the "Big Button Pad" supplied with the Xbox 360 quiz show games Scene It? Lights, Camera, Action and Scene It? Box Office Smash (2007–2008).
Dance pads, essentially a grid of flat pressure-sensitive gamepad buttons set on a mat meant to be stepped on, have seen niche success with the popularity of rhythm games like Dance Dance Revolution and Pump It Up. The dance pad was first introduced by Bandai on the Famicom in 1986 as a part of their "Family Fun Fitness" set, then Exus released the "Foot Craz" pad for the Atari 2600 in 1987. Nintendo purchased the technology from Bandai in 1988 and used it on their "Power Pad", for the Famicom and NES.
Exoskeleton controllers use exoskeleton technology to provide the player with different responses based on the player's body position, speed of movement, and other sensed data. In addition to audio and visual responses, an exoskeleton controller may provide a controlled resistance to movement and other stimuli to provide realism to the action. This not only lets players feel as if they are actually performing the function, but also helps reinforce the correct muscle pattern for the activity being simulated. The Forcetek XIO is an example of an exoskeleton video game controller.
Fishing rod: the first fishing rod controller appeared as an accessory for the Dreamcast video console for playing Sega Marine Fishing. Later other games for PlayStation console use also a similar controllers.
Floating Interactive Display: at least two commercial systems (Heliodisplay and FogScreen) offer interactive "floating interfaces" which display an image projected in mid-air but can be interacted with by finger similar to a touch screen.
Instrument panels are simulated aircraft instrument panels, either generic or specific to a real aircraft, that are used in place of the keyboard to send commands to a flight simulation program. Some of these are far more expensive than all the rest of a computer system combined. The panels usually only simulate switches, buttons, and controls, rather than output instrument displays.
Train controls: Other instrument panel like hardware such as train controls have been produced. The "RailDriver"[25] for example is designed to work with Trainz, Microsoft Train Simulator and Kuju Rail Simulator. (as of January 2009) it is limited in ease of use by the lack of a Windows API for some of the software it is designed to work with. A train controller for a Taito bullet train sim has also been made for the Wii console.[26]
Mechanical motion tracking systems like Gametrak use cables attached to gloves for tracking position of physical elements in three-dimensional space in real time. The Gametrak mechanism contains a retracting cable reel and a small tubular guide arm from which the cable passes out. The guide arm is articulated in a ball joint such that the arm and ball follow the angle at which the cable extends from the mechanism. The distance of the tracked element from the mechanism is determined through components which measure the rotation of the spool drum for the retracting cable reel, and calculating how far the cable is extended.
Microphone: A few games have made successes in using a headset or microphone as a secondary controller, such as Hey You, Pikachu!, the Rock Band series, the Guitar Hero series, the SingStar series, Tom Clancy's Endwar, Lips, the Mario Party series, and the SOCOM U.S. Navy SEALs series. The use of these microphones allowed players to issue commands to the game, controlling teammates (as in SOCOM) and other AI characters (e.g., Pikachu). The Nintendo DS features a microphone that is built into the system. It has been used for a variety of purposes, including speech recognition (Nintendogs, Brain Age: Train Your Brain in Minutes a Day!), chatting online between and during gameplay sessions (Pokémon Diamond and Pearl), and minigames that require the player to blow or shout into the microphone (Feel the Magic: XY/XX, WarioWare: Touched!, Mario Party DS).
Mind-controlled headset: As of March 24, 2007 a United States/Australian company called Emotiv Systems began launching a mind-controlled device for video games based on electroencephalography. It was reported by The Wall Street Journal's Don Clark on MSNBC.[27]
NeGcon: is a unique controller for racing games on the PlayStation. Physically it resembles a gamepad, but its left and right halves twist relative to each other, making it a variation of the paddle controller.
Optical motion tracking systems such as TrackIR and FreeTrack use a video camera to track an infrared illuminated or emissive headpiece. Small head movements are tracked and then translated into much larger virtual in-game movements, allowing hands-free view control and improved immersiveness.
PCGamerBike similar to a pair of pedals removed from an exercise bike, then set down in front of a chair & used to precisely control game characters instead.
Pinball controllers and multi-button consoles for strategy games were released in the past, but their popularity was limited to hardcore fans of the genre.
R.O.B. (Robotic Operating Buddy) is an accessory for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES), which allowed players to interact with NES games by controlling the robot. Known in Japan as the Famicom Robot, this short-lived accessory jumpstarted Nintendo's involvement in the western market, though only used for Stack-Up and Gyromite. As a character, R.O.B. appeared in later Nintendo games such as Mario Kart DS and Super Smash Bros. Brawl.
The Sega Toylet, an interactive urinal, uses urine as a control method; pressure sensors in the bowl translate the flow of urine into on-screen action.[28]
Steel Battalion for the Xbox was bundled with a full dashboard, with 2 joysticks and over 30 buttons, in an attempt to make it feel like an actual mecha simulator.
SpaceOrb 360 was a 3D mouse for spatial interaction in 6DOF that e.g. could be used with Descent.
Use on PCs and other devices[edit]
Although gamepads are generally developed for use with consoles, they are also often used for PC gaming and mobile gaming. Modern controllers, such as Sony's DualShock 4 and Nintendo's Switch Pro Controller, support USB and Bluetooth, allowing them to be directly connected to most PCs. Older gamepads can be connected through the use of official or third-party adapters. Controllers typically require the installation of device drivers to be used on contemporary personal computers.[29] The device may be directly supported, or it may require the use of a specialized program which maps controller inputs to mouse and keyboard inputs. Examples of this kind of software include JoyToKey,[30] Xpadder,[31] and antimicro, which is free, open-source, and cross-platform.[32][33]
Some controllers are specially designed for usage outside of consoles. In this case, support for mapping to different devices is built into the controller itself, such as with the Nostromo SpeedPad n52, which can act as either a keyboard, mouse, or joystick; or with the Samsung Android GamePad, designed for use with Android mobile phones.
The usage of gamepads over the mouse and keyboard has been referred to as a debate, with players of MMORPGs, RTS games, and first-person shooters tending to prefer the mouse and keyboard due to the wider variety of inputs and the high precision of the mouse when compared to an analog stick.[34] Likewise, players of racing games, fighting games, and action RPGs tend to prefer controllers for their analog inputs and ergonomic button layouts.

See also[edit]
Human interface device
List of game controllers
References[edit]


^ Thomas, David; Orland, Kyle; Steinberg, Scott (2007). The Videogame Style Guide and Reference Manual (PDF). Power Play Publishing. p. 21. ISBN 9781430313052. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2007. Retrieved September 13, 2021.

^ Lu, William. "Evolution of Video Game Controllers" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2013.

^ Miller, Patrick (26 January 2010). "How to Use Your Console Gamepad with Your PC". Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2013.

^ Kohler, Chris (2005), Power-Up: How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life, BradyGames, p. 16, ISBN 0-7440-0424-1, archived from the original on 2023-02-21, retrieved 2011-03-27 – via Google Books

^ "Logitech G Flight Simulator Yoke System with Throttle Quadrant". Logitechg.com. Archived from the original on 2019-09-20. Retrieved 2019-09-20.

^ Shelly, Gary; Vermaat, Misty (2008). Discovering Computers: Fundamentals. Boston, MA: Course Technology Cengage Learning. pp. 172. ISBN 9781423927020.

^ Chorianopoulos, Konstantinos; Divitini, Monica; Hauge, Jannicke; Jaccheri, Letizia; Malaka, Rainer (2015). Discovering Computers: Fundamentals. Heidelberg: Springer. p. 158. ISBN 9783319245881.

^ Michaels, Philip (2016-04-28). "This Bike Lets You Pedal Through Virtual Reality". Tom's Guide. Archived from the original on 2018-08-21. Retrieved 2018-08-21.

^ Ltd., Universal Timer. "Cyber ExerCycle: Interactive Exercise Bike Kit". CyberBiking.com. Archived from the original on 2021-02-28. Retrieved 2018-08-21.

^ Lemay, Ryan (February 7, 2024). "MW3 and Warzone Finally Improves Precision and Responsiveness of Aiming While Using a Mouse". Dot Esports. Retrieved May 15, 2024.

^ Fahs, Travis (April 21, 2009). "IGN Presents the History of SEGA". IGN. p. 7. Archived from the original on 2012-02-04. Retrieved 2011-04-27.

^ Light Harp at CES 1993. YouTube. Archived from the original on 2021-12-11. Retrieved 2010-07-06.

^ Horowitz, Ken (2004-08-03). "Top 10 Tuesday: Worst Game Controllers". Sega-16. Archived from the original on 2010-02-06. Retrieved 2010-12-04.

^ Castaneda, Karl (2006-05-13). "Nintendo and PixArt Team Up". Nintendo World Report. Archived from the original on 2013-12-06. Retrieved 2007-02-24.

^ Kuchera, Ben (March 16, 2017). "Nintendo Switch's World of Goo Shows Off System's Wii-Style Pointer Controls". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021.

^ Richtmyer, Steven (September 26, 2020). "Mario Galaxy Is Proof Skyward Sword Won't Work Well on Switch". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021.

^ "Access Controller | A Customizable, Adaptive Controller Kit for PS5". PlayStation. Archived from the original on 2024-04-20. Retrieved 2024-04-20.

^ "Logitech G Adaptive Gaming Kit for the Xbox Adaptive Controller". Logitechg.com. Archived from the original on 2024-04-20. Retrieved 2024-04-20.

^ Gun Buster at the Killer List of Videogames

^ Ashcraft, Brian (2008), Arcade Mania! The Turbo Charged World of Japan's Game Centers, p. 133, Kodansha International

^ Missile at the Killer List of Videogames

^ Field, Anne (2014-04-21). "Gadget Gurus Proliferate in NY's Tech Scene". Crain's New York Business. Archived from the original on 2017-03-28. Retrieved 2015-05-21.

^ Roberts, Stu (2014-09-15). "Zenytime Games Are Controlled by Your Breathing to Improve Wellbeing". Gizmag. Archived from the original on 2015-05-26. Retrieved 2015-05-21.

^ Mikuš, Nace; Leskovšek, Matevž (2012-06-22). "Breathing Through Pursed Lips Aids in Reducing Stress Anxiety". MEi. Archived from the original on 2015-05-26. Retrieved 2015-05-21.

^ "RailDriver – Desktop Train Cab Controller". RailDriver.com. Archived from the original on 2009-02-05. Retrieved 2009-01-24.

^ "Wii Train Sim Controller – Bullet Train Controller Wii: GamerSquad Discusses the Bullet Train Controller for Nintendo Wii". GamerSquad.com. Archived from the original on 2007-12-19. Retrieved 2009-01-24.

^ "Video Game Mind Control". MSNBC. 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-25.[dead link]

^ Geere, Duncan. (6 January 2011). "'Toylet' Games in Japan's Urinals". Wired UK. Archived from the original on 10 January 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2011.

^ "Best PC Gamepad: 6 Reviewed and Rated". July 30, 2011. Archived from the original on December 17, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2013.

^ "JoyToKey Official Homepage". Archived from the original on 2021-01-30.

^ "Xpadder: Play PC Games with a Game Controller Instead of a Keyboard". October 2, 2012. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013.

^ Schaaf, Tobiasa, "Gamestation Turbo", ODROID Magazine, no. July 2014, p. 17

^ Ryochan7. "Graphical Program Used to Map Keyboard Keys and Mouse Controls to a Gamepad". GitHub. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ "Mouse and Keyboard Vs. Controller: Which Is Better for PC Gaming". Intel. Archived from the original on 2021-01-21.


External links[edit]
 Media related to Game controllers at Wikimedia Commons
vteVideo game controllersController types
Arcade controller
Balance board
Digital camera
Dance pad
Gamepad
Gaming keypad
Interactive urinal
Joystick
Keyboard
Light gun
Microphone
Motion controller
Mouse
Musical Instruments
Paddle
Pedal
Wheel (direct drive)
Remote control
Virtual reality headset
Wired glove
Controller partsPhysical buttons
Analog stick
Arrow keys
D-pad
Hat switch
Scroll wheel
Select button
Start button
Telephone keypad
Trackball
Trigger
Sensitive
Accelerometer
Force feedback
Gesture recognition
Haptic technology
Stylus
Digital pen
Touchpad
Touchscreen
Related
List of game controllers
Multitap
Reset button
R.O.B.
Toys-to-life





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Game_controller&oldid=1286559416"
Categories: American inventionsGame controllersHidden categories: KLOV game ID not in WikidataAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2016CS1 maint: numeric names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 17:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Game controller




























30 languages


Add topic
















