https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Government




Government of the United Kingdom - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Powers




Toggle Powers subsection





2.1
Royal Prerogative








2.2
Domestic powers








2.3
Foreign powers










3
Ministers and departments








4
Government in Parliament








5
Location








6
Limits of government power








7
Terminology








8
Symbols








9
Devolved governments








10
Local government








11
See also








12
References








13
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Government of the United Kingdom



49 languages




العربيةAsturianuবাংলাभोजपुरीCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGaeilge한국어हिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתMagyarمصرىBahasa MelayuNederlandsनेपाली日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsРусскийScotsShqipසිංහලSimple EnglishکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаVènetoTiếng Việt粵語中文ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikiquoteWikisourceWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from British Government)
"His Majesty's Government" and "Her Majesty's Government" redirect here. For the use of the term, see His Majesty's Government (term).
Central executive authority of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
This article is about the central executive authority of the UK. For the people in the current British administration, see British Government frontbench. For the broader political system of the UK, see Politics of the United Kingdom.


His Majesty's GovernmentWelsh: Llywodraeth ei FawrhydiIrish: Rialtas a ShoilseScottish Gaelic: Riaghaltas a MhòrachdCentral government
The Royal Arms used since October 2024[1]OverviewState United KingdomLeaderPrime Minister
Keir StarmerAppointed byMonarch of the United Kingdom
Charles III on the advice of the prime ministerMain organCabinet of the United KingdomMinistries24 ministerial departments, 20 non-ministerial departmentsResponsible toParliament of the United KingdomAnnual budget£1,189 billionHeadquarters10 Downing Street, LondonWebsitegov.uk 
This article is part of a series onPolitics of the United Kingdom
Constitution
Magna Carta
Bill of Rights
Treaty of Union (Acts of Union)
Parliamentary sovereignty
Rule of law
Separation of powers
Other constitutional principles

The Crown
The Monarch (list)
King Charles III


Heir apparent
William, Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession
Prerogative
Counsellors of State
Republicanism in the United Kingdom

Executive
Privy Council

Charles III(King-in-Council)


HM Government


Cabinet (list)
Starmer ministry (L)

Prime Minister (list)
Keir Starmer (L)

Deputy Prime Minister
Angela Rayner (L)


Departments
Ministers
Agencies

Legislature
UK Parliament
(King-in-Parliament)



King
Charles III


House of Lords


Lord SpeakerThe Lord McFall of Alcluith

House of Commons


SpeakerSir Lindsay Hoyle
Leader of the OppositionKemi Badenoch (C)

59th Parliament
Opposition
MPs
List of MPs

JudiciaryCharles III(King-on-the-Bench)

Supreme Court


President
The Lord Reed

Deputy President
The Lord Hodge

Justices of the Supreme Court

United Kingdom
England and Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland

Bank of England
Governor
Andrew Bailey

Deputy governors
Monetary Policy Committee


Currencies
Banknotes
Coins

Elections and referendums
Censorship
UK Parliament constituencies (2023 Periodic Review of Westminster constituencies)
Political parties
Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000
Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022
Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions
Senedd constituencies and electoral regions


UK general elections


1801 co-option
1802
1806
1807
1812
1818
1820
1826
1830
1831
1832–33
1835
1837
1841
1847
1852
1857
1859
1865
1868
1874
1880
1885
1886
1892
1895
1900
1906
1910 (Jan–Feb)
1910 (Dec)
1918
1922
1923
1924
1929
1931
1935
1945
1950
1951
1955
1959
1964
1966
1970
1974 (Feb)
1974 (Oct)
1979
1983
1987
1992
1997
2001
2005
2010
2015
2017
2019
2024

Endorsements

2010
2015
2017
2019
2024

European Parliament elections (1979–2019)


1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
2009
2014
2019

Scottish Parliament elections


1999
2003
2007
2011
2016
2021
Next

Northern Ireland Assembly elections


1998
2003
2007
2011
2016
2017
2022
Next

Senedd elections


1999
2003
2007
2011
2016
2021
Next

UK referendums


1975
2011
2016


Devolution
Intergovernmental relations in the United Kingdom
Legislative consent motions
Prime Minister and Heads of Devolved Governments Council
Council of the Nations and Regions

England
Governance of England
English votes for English laws
Greater London Authority
1998 referendum
Greater London Authority Act 1999(2007 Act)
Mayor of London
Sadiq Khan
Mayoral cabinet
London Assembly
London Plan
Combined authorities
Metro mayors

Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Act 1998(2006 Act)
First Minister 
Michelle O'Neill
deputy First Minister 
Emma Little-Pengelly
Executive
Assembly
Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Law of Northern Ireland

Scotland
Scottish devolution
1997 referendum
Scotland Act 1998(2012 Act, 2016 Act)
First Minister
John Swinney
Government
Scottish Parliament
Act of the Scottish Parliament
Scottish statutory instrument
Scots law

Wales
Welsh devolution
1997 referendum(2011 referendum on law-making powers)
Government of Wales Act 1998(2006 Act, Wales Act 2014, Wales Act 2017)
First Minister
Eluned Morgan
Government
Senedd
Measure of the National Assembly for Wales (1999–2011)
Act of Senedd Cymru
Welsh law

AdministrationEngland
History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties (list)
Metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties
Metropolitan county
Non-metropolitan county
Greater London
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Metropolitan Borough
Non-metropolitan District
London Borough
Civil parishes (list)
Historic counties

Northern Ireland
History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts

Scotland
History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes
Shires of Scotland

Wales
History
Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties

Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey 
Guernsey
Alderney
Sark



Bailiwick of Jersey



Isle of Man


British Islands
Common Travel Area
UK-CD Customs Union

Overseas Territories
Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Saint Helena
Ascension Island
Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands


British Overseas Territories citizen
Visa requirements
Visa policies

British Overseas Territories Act 2002
UK-OT JMC
Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute
Gibraltar sovereignty dispute
Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute

Foreign relations
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
Foreign policy (history)

Diplomatic missions of / in the United Kingdom

UK passport
British National (Overseas) passport
Visa requirements
UK–CD Customs Union
Visa policy
Free trade agreements

Australia
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Brunei
Canada
China
Hong Kong
Cyprus
Denmark
France
Germany
India
Israel
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Malaysia
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Spain
South Africa
Palestine
Pakistan
Poland
Portugal
United States
Zimbabwe

Ireland
politics of Northern Ireland
Good Friday Agreement
UK–Ireland border
Northern Ireland Protocol
British–Irish Council

European Union (history)
Brexit
Post-Brexit United Kingdom relations with the European Union
UK–EU withdrawal agreement

The Commonwealth
member states

United Kingdom and the United Nations
United Nations Security Council
P5

NATO
G20
G7

 United Kingdom portal
 England
 Northern Ireland
 Scotland
 Wales

Other countries
vte
His Majesty's Government (or Her Majesty's Government when a queen reigns), abbreviated to HM Government or HMG,[2] is the central executive authority of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.[3][4] The government is led by the prime minister (Keir Starmer since 5 July 2024) who selects all the other ministers. The country has had a Labour government since 2024. The prime minister and his most senior ministers belong to the supreme decision-making committee, known as the Cabinet.[4]
Ministers of the Crown are responsible to the House in which they sit; they make statements in that House and take questions from members of that House. For most senior ministers this is usually the elected House of Commons rather than the House of Lords. The government is dependent on Parliament to make primary legislation,[5] and general elections are held every five years (at most) to elect a new House of Commons, unless the prime minister advises the monarch to dissolve Parliament, in which case an election may be held sooner. After an election, the monarch selects as prime minister the leader of the party most likely to command the confidence of the House of Commons, usually by possessing a majority of MPs.[6]
Under the uncodified British constitution, executive authority lies with the sovereign, although this authority is exercised only after receiving the advice of the Privy Council.[7] The prime minister, the House of Lords, the leader of the opposition, and the police and military high command serve as members and advisers of the monarch on the Privy Council. In most cases the cabinet exercise power directly as leaders of the government departments, though some Cabinet positions are sinecures to a greater or lesser degree (for instance Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster or Lord Privy Seal).
The government is sometimes referred to by the metonym "Westminster" or "Whitehall", as many of its offices are situated there. These metonyms are used especially by members of the Scottish Government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive to differentiate their government from His Majesty's Government.


History[edit]
Further information: History of the constitution of the United Kingdom and History of monarchy in the United Kingdom
The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy in which the reigning monarch (that is, the king or queen who is the head of state at any given time) does not make any open political decisions. All political decisions are taken by the government and Parliament. This constitutional state of affairs is the result of a long history of constraining and reducing the political power of the monarch, beginning with Magna Carta in 1215.
Since the start of Edward VII's reign in 1901, by convention, the prime minister has been an elected member of Parliament (MP) and thus answerable to the House of Commons, although there were two weeks in 1963 when Alec Douglas-Home was first a member of the House of Lords and then of neither house. A similar convention applies to the position of chancellor of the exchequer. The last chancellor of the exchequer to be a member of the House of Lords was Lord Denman, who served for one month in 1834.[8]

Powers[edit]
Royal Prerogative[edit]
Main article: Royal Prerogative in the United Kingdom
The British monarch is the head of state and the sovereign, but not the head of government. In practice, the monarch conventionally takes little direct part in governing the country and remains neutral in political affairs. However, the authority of the state that is vested in the sovereign, known as the Crown, remains the source of executive power exercised by the government.
In addition to explicit statutory authority, the Crown also possesses a body of powers in certain matters collectively known as the royal prerogative. These powers range from the authority to issue or withdraw passports to declarations of war. By long-standing convention, most of these powers are delegated from the sovereign to various ministers or other officers of the Crown, who may use them without having to obtain the consent of Parliament.
The prime minister also has weekly meetings with the monarch. What is said in these meetings is strictly private; however, they generally involve government and political matters which the monarch has a "right and a duty" to comment on.[9] Such comments are non-binding however and the King must ultimately abide by decisions of the government.[10]
Royal prerogative powers include, but are not limited to, the following:

Domestic powers[edit]
The power to appoint and dismiss a prime minister. This power is exercised by the monarch personally. However, the last time the monarch used their own discretion when exercising this power was 1834, with the modern convention that they appoint (and are expected to appoint) the individual most likely to be capable of commanding of a majority in the House of Commons.[11]
The power to appoint and dismiss other ministers. This power is exercised by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister.
The power to assent to and enact laws by giving royal assent to bills passed by Parliament, which is required for a law to become effective (an act). This is exercised by the monarch, who also theoretically has the power to refuse assent, although no monarch has refused assent to a bill passed by Parliament since Queen Anne in 1708.
The power to give and to issue commissions to commissioned officers in the Armed Forces.
The power to command the Armed Forces. This power is exercised by the Defence Council in the King's name.
The power to appoint members to the Privy Council.
The power to issue, suspend, cancel, recall, impound, withdraw, or revoke British passports and the general power to provide or deny British passport facilities to British citizens and British nationals. This is exercised in the United Kingdom (but not necessarily in the Isle of Man, Channel Islands or British Overseas Territories) by the home secretary.
The power to pardon any conviction (the royal prerogative of mercy).
The power to grant, cancel and annul any honours.
The power to create corporations (including the status of being a city, with its corporation) by royal charter, and to amend, replace and revoke existing charters.
Foreign powers[edit]
UK Government Overseas logo.
The Cabinet Office, located near Downing Street, supports the work of the Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet
The power to make and ratify treaties.
The power to declare war and conclude peace with other nations.
The power to deploy the Armed Forces overseas.
The power to recognise states.
The credit power and receive diplomats.
While no formal documents set out the prerogatives, the government published the above list in October 2003 to increase transparency, as some of the powers exercised in the name of the monarch are part of the royal prerogative.[12] However, the complete extent of the royal prerogative powers has never been fully set out, as many of them originated in ancient custom and the period of absolute monarchy, or were modified by later constitutional practice.

Ministers and departments[edit]
Main articles: List of government ministers of the United Kingdom and Departments of the Government of the United Kingdom
As of 2019, there are around 120 government ministers[13] supported by 560,000[14] civil servants and other staff working in the 24 ministerial departments[15] and their executive agencies. There are also an additional 20 non-ministerial departments with a range of further responsibilities.
In theory, a government minister does not have to be a member of either House of Parliament. In practice, however, the convention is that ministers must be members of either the House of Commons or the House of Lords to be accountable to Parliament. From time to time, prime ministers appoint non-parliamentarians as ministers. In recent years such ministers have been appointed to the House of Lords.[16]

Government in Parliament[edit]
The government is required by convention and for practical reasons to maintain the confidence of the House of Commons. It requires the support of the House of Commons for the maintenance of supply (by voting through the government's budgets) and to pass primary legislation. By convention, if a government loses the confidence of the House of Commons it must either resign or a general election is held. The support of the lords, while useful to the government in getting its legislation passed without delay, is not vital. A government is not required to resign even if it loses the confidence of the lords and is defeated in key votes in that House. The House of Commons is thus the responsible house.
The prime minister is held to account during Prime Minister's Questions (PMQs) which provides an opportunity for MPs from all parties to question the PM on any subject. There are also departmental questions when ministers answer questions relating to their specific departmental brief. Unlike PMQs, both the cabinet ministers for the department and junior ministers within the department may answer on behalf of the government, depending on the topic of the question.
During debates on legislation proposed by the government, ministers—usually with departmental responsibility for the bill—will lead the debate for the government and respond to points made by MPs or Lords.
Committees[17] of both the House of Commons and House of Lords hold the government to account, scrutinise its work and examine in detail proposals for legislation. Ministers appear before committees to give evidence and answer questions.
Government ministers are also required by convention and the Ministerial Code,[18] when Parliament is sitting, to make major statements regarding government policy or issues of national importance to Parliament. This allows MPs or Lords to question the government on the statement. When the government instead chooses to make announcements first outside Parliament, it is often the subject of significant criticism from MPs and the speaker of the House of Commons.[19]

Location[edit]
The main entrance of 10 Downing Street, the official residence and office of the First Lord of the Treasury, who is by custom nowadays also the prime minister
The prime minister is based at 10 Downing Street in Westminster, London. Cabinet meetings also take place here. Most government departments have their headquarters nearby in Whitehall.

Limits of government power[edit]
See also: Act of Parliament (UK) and Powers of the prime minister of the United Kingdom
The government's powers include general executive and statutory powers, delegated legislation, and numerous powers of appointment and patronage. However, some powerful officials and bodies, (e.g. HM judges, local authorities, and the charity commissions) are legally more or less independent of the government, and government powers are legally limited to those retained by the Crown under common law or granted and limited by act of Parliament. Both substantive and procedural limitations are enforceable in the courts by judicial review.
Nevertheless, magistrates and mayors can still be arrested and put on trial for corruption, and the government has powers to insert commissioners into a local authority to oversee its work, and to issue directives that must be obeyed by the local authority if the local authority is not abiding by its statutory obligations.[20]
By contrast, as in European Union (EU) member states, EU officials cannot be prosecuted for any actions carried out in pursuit of their official duties, and foreign country diplomats (though not their employees) and foreign members of the European Parliament[21] are immune from prosecution in EU states under any circumstance. As a consequence, neither EU bodies nor diplomats have to pay taxes, since it would not be possible to prosecute them for tax evasion. When the UK was a member of the EU, this caused a dispute when the US ambassador to the UK claimed that London's congestion charge was a tax, and not a charge (despite the name), and therefore he did not have to pay it—a claim the Greater London Authority disputed.
Similarly, the monarch is immune from criminal prosecution and may only be sued with his permission (this is known as sovereign immunity). The sovereign, by law, is not required to pay income tax, but Queen Elizabeth II voluntarily paid it from 1993 until the end of her reign in 2022, and also paid local rates voluntarily. However, the monarchy also received a substantial grant from the government, the Sovereign Support Grant, and Queen Elizabeth II's inheritance from her mother, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, was exempt from inheritance tax.
In addition to legislative powers, His Majesty's Government has substantial influence over local authorities and other bodies set up by it, through financial powers and grants. Many functions carried out by local authorities, such as paying out housing benefits and council tax benefits, are funded or substantially part-funded by the central government.
Neither the central government nor local authorities are permitted to sue anyone for defamation. Individual politicians are allowed to sue people for defamation in a personal capacity and without using government funds, but this is relatively rare (although George Galloway, who was a backbench MP for a quarter of a century, has sued or threatened to sue for defamation several times). However, it is a criminal offence to make a false statement about any election candidate during an election, to reduce the number of votes they receive (as with libel, opinions do not count).

Terminology[edit]
While the government is the current group of ministers (the British Government frontbench), the government is also sometimes seen more broadly as including people or organisations that work for the ministers. The civil service, while 'independent of government',[22] is sometimes described as being part of the government,[23][24][25][26] due to the closeness of its working with ministers, in advising them, supporting them, and implementing their executive decisions. Some individuals who work for ministers even have the word 'Government' in their titles, such as the Government Actuary and the Government Chief Scientific Adviser, as do civil service organisations such as the Government Statistical Service, the Government Legal Profession, and the Government Office for Science. Companies owned by the government can also be seen as parts of the government, such as UK Government Investments[27] and HS2 Ltd.[28]
Similarly, Parliamentary Private Secretaries are not ministers and so not part of the government.[29] However, they are bound by parts of the ministerial code, are part of the payroll vote, and can be seen as being on the 'first rung of the ministerial ladder'.[30][31] They are sometimes described as being part of the government.[32][33][34]

Symbols[edit]
Main article: Coat of arms of the United Kingdom
The lesser arms used during different reignsLesser arms used since 2024Lesser arms used during the reign of Elizabeth IILesser arms designed by George Kruger Gray for George V in 1924Lesser arms used from 1901 to 1910 during the reign of Edward VII
The UK Government uses a simplified form of the Royal Arms as a logo called the lesser arms. It typically omits the helm and mantling, reduces the crest to the crown alone, and has no compartment.[35] Although the blazon of the arms has not changed since 1837, a new depiction of the Royal Arms is created for each new reign.[35]
Use of the Royal Arms by government departments and agencies is governed by the Cabinet Office.[36] The Royal Arms feature on all Acts of Parliament, in the logos of government departments, on the cover of all UK passports (and passports issued in other British territories and dependencies), as an inescutcheon on the diplomatic flags of British Ambassadors, and on The London Gazette. It is also used in the British Overseas Territories, namely on all acts of the Anguilla House of Assembly and by the administrations of Akrotiri and Dhekelia, the Pitcairn Islands, and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.
Some departments use a different symbol as their logo historic reasons, including the Scotland Office, Home Office, Ministry of Defence and Department for Business and Trade.[36]

Devolved governments[edit]
Main article: Devolution in the United Kingdom
Since 1999, certain areas of central government have been devolved to accountable governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. These are not part of His Majesty's Government, and are directly accountable to their institutions, with their authority under the Crown; in contrast, there is no devolved national government for England, although certain powers of central government are devolved to regional authorities. 

Local government[edit]
Refurbishment notice at Old Fire Station, Oxford, showing government support
Main articles: Local government in England, Local government in Scotland, Local government in Wales, and Local government in Northern Ireland
Up to three layers of elected local authorities (such as county, district and parish Councils) exist throughout all parts of the United Kingdom, in some places merged into unitary authorities. They have limited local tax-raising powers. Many other authorities and agencies also have statutory powers, generally subject to some central government supervision.

See also[edit]

Politics portalUnited Kingdom portal
Constitutional reform in the United Kingdom
Departments of the Government of the United Kingdom
Disestablishmentarianism
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
Gov.uk
Government spending in the United Kingdom
British Government frontbench
His Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition
List of British governments
Northern Ireland Executive
Office for Veterans' Affairs
Scottish Government
Welsh Government
Whole of Government Accounts
References[edit]


^ "New Coat of Arms". Government Communication Service. UK Government. 10 October 2024. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ "HMG". Cambridge Dictionary. Retrieved 18 March 2025.

^ His Majesty's Government Archived 17 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 28 June 2010

^ a b Overview of the UK system of government : Directgov – Government, citizens and rights. Archived direct.gov.uk webpage. Retrieved on 29 August 2014.

^ "Legislation". UK Parliament. 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013.

^ House of Commons – Justice Committee – Written Evidence Archived 1 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved on 19 October 2010.

^ The monarchy : Directgov – Government, citizens and rights. Archived direct.gov.uk webpage. Retrieved on 29 August 2014.

^ The Parliament Acts – UK Parliament Archived 5 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Parliament.uk (21 April 2010). Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ "Queen and Prime Minister". The British Monarchy. 2013. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2013.

^ "The Queen and Boris Johnson: Why do the monarch and PM meet every week?". BBC Newsround. 24 June 2021.

^ "The Cabinet Manual: A guide to laws, conventions and rules on the operation of government" (PDF). UK Government. October 2011. p. 14.

^ Mystery lifted on Queen's powers | Politics Archived 4 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ Maer, Lucinda; Kelly, Richard (31 March 2021). "Limitations on the number of Ministers". Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2021 – via commonslibrary.parliament.uk.

^ Civil Service Statistics Archived 10 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine. civilservant.org.uk. September 2011

^ "Departments, Agencies and Public Bodies" UK Government

^ Maer, Lucinda (4 September 2017). "Ministers in the House of Lords".

^ Committees – UK Parliament Archived 7 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Parliament.uk (21 April 2010). Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ Ministerial Code. Cabinet Office 2010

^ "Speakers' statements on ministerial policy announcements made outside the House" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2010.. Parliamentary Information List. Department of Information Services. www.parliament.uk. 16 July 2010

^ "Secretary of State sends in commissioners to Tower Hamlets". Gov.uk. 17 December 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ "The Immunity of Members of the European Parliament" (PDF). European Union. October 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ "Civil Service: About us". GOV.UK. Retrieved 26 October 2021. We're politically impartial and independent of government

^ The Comptroller and Auditor General (5 June 2015). Central government staff costs (Report). National Audit Office. Retrieved 26 October 2021.

^ "Civil service". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 29 October 2021. civil service, the body of government officials...

^ "UK government action to reduce the HGV driver shortage". GOV.UK. Retrieved 23 October 2021. The government... have sent nearly one million letters to thank HGV drivers

^ "HMG personnel security controls". GOV.UK. 1 April 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2021.

^ "What we do". UKGI.ORG.UK. Retrieved 27 October 2021. UKGI's purpose is to be the government's centre of excellence in corporate governance and corporate finance

^ "Government provides construction sector certainty by confirming 'Notice to proceed' on High Speed 2". GOV.UK. 15 April 2020. Retrieved 27 October 2021. HS2 Ltd today marks the next step for the project, issuing a 'Notice to proceed' on Britain's new railway.

^ S Priddy (22 October 2021). Parliamentary Private Secretaries to Prime Ministers since 1906 (Report). House of Commons Library. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Parliamentary Private Secretaries (PPSs) are not members of the Government although they do have responsibilities and restrictions as defined by the Ministerial Code

^ "Back to the future: PPS role for mid Wales MP". BBC News. 6 September 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Montgomeryshire Tory MP Glyn Davies is about to put his foot on the first rung of the ministerial ladder, rejoining the government as a parliamentary private secretary.

^ "The female power base that helped Theresa May win her day". Financial Times. 18 September 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A handful of other alumni who won their seats in 2015, including Victoria Atkins, Lucy Frazer and Victoria Prentis have just set foot on the first rung of the ministerial ladder, being appointed this week as parliamentary private secretaries.

^ "Tory MP Caroline Ansell resigns from government over free school meals rebellion". SKY NEWS. 22 October 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A Tory MP has quit her junior government role... Caroline Ansell resigned as a parliamentary private secretary to the environment secretary

^ "Six MPs could quit Government in Covid restrictions rebellion". Daily Telegraph. 10 December 2021. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2021. As many as six MPs could quit as members of the Government next week... The Telegraph has learned that at least six parliamentary private secretaries are preparing to defy Boris Johnson and vote against elements of his "Plan B" restrictions

^ "Chris Green quits as junior government member over Bolton local lockdown". LBC NEWS. 13 October 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A junior government member has resigned over the local lockdown in Bolton... Bolton West Conservative MP Chris Green has stepped down as a parliamentary private secretary (PPS)

^ a b "New Coat of Arms artwork unveiled". Cabinet Office. UK Government. 10 October 2024. Retrieved 27 October 2024.

^ a b "HM Government Identity Guidelines 2022" (PDF). Civil Service. February 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2024.


External links[edit]
Official website 
Official website of 10 Downing Street UK Government list of ministers from gov.uk
How Government works overview from gov.uk
Government
vtePolitics and governmentOverviews
State
Nation
Empire
Central government
Unitary state
Federal government
National unity government
Levels:
Local government
County government
Administrative division
Municipality
Township
Systems
Lists:
Govt systems
Countries by system
Systems:
Anarchy
Aristocracy
Bureaucracy
Capitalism
Confederation
Colonialism
Communism
Electocracy
Ergatocracy
Federalism
Feudalism
Geniocracy
Kleptocracy
Meritocracy
Military dictatorship
Monarchy
Oligarchy
Plutocracy
Republicanism
Socialism
Statism
Technocracy
Theocracy
Totalitarianism
Democracy:
Parliamentary system
Presidential system
Cellular 
Collaborative
Consensus
Conservative
Cosmopolitan
Direct democracy
Representative democracy
Republic
Philosophies
Agrarianism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Centrism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Communalism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Corporatism
Distributism
Egalitarianism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Familialism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Liberalism
Progressivism
Theoreticians:
John Locke
Functions
Social insurance
Law enforcement
Unemployment benefits
National healthcare
Public education
Military
Espionage
Regulation:
Environmental regulation
Banking regulation
Food inspection
Municipal:
Traffic lights
Sanitation
Street cleaning
Components
Documents
Constitution
Charter
Uncodified constitution
Roles:
Head of state
Head of government
Monarch
President
Prime minister
Bodies:
Cabinet
Ministry
Judiciary
Legislature
Legislative bodies
Congress
Parliament
Council
Assembly
Legislative council
Governance  processes
Process:
Hearing
Committee
Town meeting
Outcomes:
Legislation
Regulation
Zoning
Law:
Precedent
Politics
Elections:
Voting
Campaigns
Groups:
Political parties
Advocacy groups
Issues:
Civil rights
Environmentalism
Academic
Fields of study
Political science
Urban planning
Sociology
History
Overviews:
Political history of the world
History of political thought
Reforms
Suffrage
Documents:
Magna Carta
U.S. Constitution
International
Diplomacy
Embassy
Treaty
International law
World:
World government
United Nations
European Union
World Court
Related
Human history
History of philosophy
Civilization
Templates:
{{Political ideologies}}
{{Political culture}}
{{Political spectrum}}
{{Social and political philosophy}}
{{liberalism}}
{{Conservatism navbox}}
{{aspects of capitalism}}
{{Western culture}}
{{Autonomous types of first-tier administration}}
{{World government}}
Categories
Forms of government
Types of democracy
Political parties

vteCommon types of government ministers and ministriesLeadership
President
Vice president
Prime minister
Deputy prime minister
First minister
Deputy First Minister
Premier
Office of the president
Cabinet department / Office of the prime minister
Speaker / President of the assembly
Minister
Titles
Secretary of state
Minister of state
Deputy minister
Undersecretary
Assistant minister/Parliamentary secretary
Associate Minister
Defence /  foreign affairs /public safety
Ministry of defence
Ministry of foreign affairs
Immigration minister
Interior minister
Interior ministry
International development minister
Europe
Economics/infrastructure
Commerce minister
Ministry of the economy
Ministry of finance
Industry minister
Ministry of infrastructure
Ministry of trade and industry
Ministry of transport
Environment / natural resources
Energy minister
Ministry of energy
Environment minister
Ministry of electricity
Ministry of petroleum
Ministry of water resources
Social
Culture minister
Ministry of culture
Education minister
Ministry of education and culture
Health minister
Ministry of health
Information minister
Housing minister
Ministry of housing
Ministry of justice
Minister of labour
Ministry of labour
Regional minister
Ministry of sports
Tourism minister
Ministry of home affairs
Ministry of religious affairs
Ministry of science
Ministry of social affairs
Ministry of social security
Minister for Veterans
Ministry of women
Minister for women
Other
Minister without portfolio
Lists
Presidents
Vice presidents
Prime ministers
Deputy prime ministers
Presidents of assembly
Agriculture ministries
Climate change ministers
Communications ministries
Defence ministers
Education ministries
Environment ministers
Environment ministries
Finance ministers
Foreign ministers
Forest ministries
Health ministries (mental health)
Interior ministers
Public works ministries

 Government ministers by portfolio
 Ministries by portfolio

vtePublic services
Municipalization
Nationalization
Progressive tax
Concepts
Common good
Free-culture movement
Free newspaper
Product sample
Public administration
Public bad
Public domain
Public good (economics)
Public health
Public interest
Public land
Public ownership
Public policy
Public rights
Public sphere
Public procurement
Public trust
Public value
Universal access to education
Universal basic services
Basic services
Civil service
Fire department
Law enforcement
Postal service
Savings system
Public broadcasting
Public transport
Universal basic services
Public utility
Electric utility
Oil & gas
Telecommunication
Municipal broadband
Public infrastructure
Public water system
Waste management
Public works
Drinking fountain
Free clinic
Free education
Infrastructure
Needle and syringe programmes
Public art
Public bank
Public bookcase
Public computer
Public hospital
Public library
Public open space
Public school
Public space
Public toilet
Public university
Supervised injection site
Urban park
Social services
Publicly funded health care
Public housing
Job creation
Job guarantee
Single-payer health care
National health insurance
Social insurance
Social pension
Social security
Youth services
See also
Commons
Government auction
Public float
Public holiday
Public offering
Public sector
Public security
Public use
Public viewing area

 Category
 Commons

vteList of current heads of government in the United KingdomHis Majesty's GovernmentMajorityLabourPrime MinisterKeir Starmer (Labour)Northern Ireland ExecutivePower-sharingDUP / Sinn Féin / SDLP / UUP / APNIFirst MinisterMichelle O'Neill (Sinn Féin)Deputy First MinisterEmma Little-Pengelly (DUP)Scottish GovernmentMinorityScottish National PartyFirst MinisterJohn Swinney (SNP)Welsh GovernmentMinorityLabourFirst MinisterEluned Morgan (Labour)Heads of governments of British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies
vteDepartments of the Government of the United KingdomMinisterial
Advocate General for Scotland
Attorney General's Office
Business and Trade
Cabinet Office
Culture, Media and Sport
Defence
Education
Energy Security and Net Zero
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Health and Social Care
Home
Housing, Communities and Local Government
Justice
Leader of the House of Commons
Leader of the House of Lords
Northern Ireland
Science, Innovation and Technology
Scotland
Transport
Treasury
UK Export Finance
Wales
Work and Pensions
Non-ministerial
Charity Commission for England and Wales
Competition and Markets Authority
Crown Prosecution Service
Food Standards Agency
Forestry Commission
Government Actuary's Department
Government Legal Department
HM Land Registry
HM Revenue and Customs
National Crime Agency
National Savings and Investments
Office of Rail and Road
Ofgem
Ofqual
Ofsted
Ofwat
Serious Fraud Office
Supreme Court
The National Archives
UK Statistics Authority

vteBritish–Irish CouncilGood Friday AgreementMember jurisdictions
United Kingdom
Ireland
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Member bodies
Government of the United Kingdom
Government of Ireland
Policy and Resources Committee of Guernsey
Isle of Man Government
Government of Jersey
Northern Ireland Executive
Scottish Government
Welsh Government
Work areas
Demography
eHealth
Environment
Indigenous, minority and lesser-used languages
Knowledge economy
Misuse of drugs
Social inclusion
Tourism
Transport
Representatives of states
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
Taoiseach (of Ireland)
President of the Policy and Resources Committee of Guernsey
Chief Minister of the Isle of Man
Chief Minister of Jersey
First Minister and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland
First Minister of Scotland
First Minister of Wales

vteGovernments of EuropeSovereign states
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Vatican City
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Dependencies andother entities
Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard
Other entities
European Union

vteUnited Kingdom articlesHistoryChronology
Formation
Union of England and Scotland Act 1603
Treaty of Union
Acts of Union 1707
Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
civilian
military
Postwar
political
social
Since 1979
political
social
By topic
Economic
Empire
Foreign relations
1814–1919
Law enforcement
Maritime
Mass surveillance
Military
Taxation
Women's history
GeographyAdministrative
Counties of the United Kingdom
Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown Dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies
Physical
British Isles
terminology
Great Britain
Climate
change
Coastline
Geology
Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes
Resources
Agriculture
Energy
biodiesel
coal
geothermal
hydraulic frac.
hydroelectricity
marine
North Sea oil
Renewable energy
solar
wind
Fishing
English
Scottish
Welsh
Hunting
Materials
forestry
mining
Wildlife
fauna
flora
Politics
Constitution
Corruption
Devolution
Elections
By-elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
LGBT
Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Local government
Monarchy
monarchs
republicanism
Nationality
Parliament
House of Commons
House of Lords
Political parties
Female party leaders
Political scandals
Shadow Cabinet
Government
Cabinet
list
Civil service
Departments
Ministers
list
Prime Minister
list
Military
His Majesty's Naval Service
British Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction
Economy
Banks
Bank of England
Budget
Economic geography
Free trade agreements
Income
Manufacturing
Pound sterling (currency)
Science and technology
Stock exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Air transport
Bus transport
Driving
Roads
Rail transport
Society
Cannabis
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Environmental inequality
Environmental issues
Ethnic groups
Health
Homelessness
England
Scotland
Housing
Hunger
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Life expectancy
Mental health
Poverty
Prostitution
Public holidays
Racism
Social care
Social class
Suicide
Universal basic income (UBI)
Water supply and sanitation
Waste
Welfare state
Culture
Art
Anthem
Cinema
Cuisine
Wine
Identity
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre
Stereotypes of the British
World Heritage Sites
Anglosphere
Countries of the United KingdomEngland
History
social
timeline
Geography
Politics
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Homelessness
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Northern Ireland
History
Geography
Politics
Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Scotland
History
timeline
Geography
Politics
Parliament
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Homelessness
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Wales
History
Geography
Politics
Senedd
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Authority control databases InternationalISNIVIAFNationalGermanyUnited StatesOtherTe Papa (New Zealand)




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=1282722816"
Categories: Government of the United KingdomConstitution of the United KingdomExecutive branches of governmentWestminster system governmentsEuropean governmentsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse British English from July 2020Use dmy dates from January 2017Articles containing Welsh-language textArticles containing Irish-language textArticles containing Scottish Gaelic-language textPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia






 This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 06:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Government of the United Kingdom




























49 languages


Add topic
















