https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Linux_distributions




List of Linux distributions - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Debian-based




Toggle Debian-based subsection





1.1
Ubuntu-based






1.1.1
Current official derivatives








1.1.2
Discontinued official derivatives








1.1.3
Unofficial derivatives










1.2
Knoppix-based










2
Pacman-based




Toggle Pacman-based subsection





2.1
Arch Linux-based








2.2
Other Pacman-based










3
RPM-based




Toggle RPM-based subsection





3.1
Fedora-based






3.1.1
RHEL-based










3.2
openSUSE-based








3.3
Mandriva-based








3.4
Other RPM-based










4
Gentoo-based








5
Slackware-based








6
Android-based








7
Source-based








8
Other distributions








9
Historical distributions








10
See also








11
References








12
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







List of Linux distributions



31 languages




العربيةবাংলাBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisગુજરાતીहिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaעבריתMagyarമലയാളംBahasa Melayuမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsPlattdüütschPortuguêsRomânăසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiTagalogTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


WikidataWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide









Checked


From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Page version statusThis is an accepted version of this pageThis is the latest accepted revision, reviewed on 23 April 2025.
List of software distributions using the Linux kernel


This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Find sources: "List of Linux distributions" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: references need cleaning up, most are simply directory links to the distribution sites, which are handled already in the articles about them. Please help improve this article if you can. (February 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Timeline of the development of main Linux distributions[1]
This page provides general information about notable Linux distributions in the form of a categorized list. Distributions are organized into sections by the major distribution or package management system they are based on.


Debian-based[edit]
Debian family tree
Debian (a portmanteau of the names "Deb" and "Ian") Linux is a distribution that emphasizes free software. It supports many hardware platforms. Debian and distributions based on it use the .deb package format[2] and the dpkg package manager and its frontends (such as apt or synaptic).[3]



Distribution
Description


antiX

A comparatively lightweight distribution suitable for older computers, while also providing kernel and applications, as well as updates and additions via the Aptitude and Debian-compatible repositories.


Astra Linux

A Russian distribution developed to meet the needs of the Russian army and other armed forces and intelligence agencies.[4] It provides data protection up to the level of "top secret" in Russian classified information grade. It has been officially certified by Russian Defense Ministry, Federal Service for Technical and Export Control[5] and Federal Security Service.[6]


Bharat Operating System Solutions (BOSS)

An Indian Linux distribution[7]


Canaima

A Venezuelan Linux distribution.[8]


Corel Linux

Short-lived commercial desktop Linux distribution, bought by Xandros Linux.[9]


CrunchBang Linux

A small distribution and Live CD based on Debian Stable, featuring the Openbox window manager and tint2 panel with GTK+ applications.[10] Development has ended for CrunchBang as of February, 2015.[11]


Deepin

A Chinese Linux Distribution developed by Wuhan Deepin Technology Co.


Devuan

A fork of Debian begun in 2014 with the primary goal of allowing user choice in init systems, by decoupling software packages from systemd.[12]


DoudouLinux

A discontinued distribution intended for children.


Dreamlinux

A discontinued Brazilian distribution.


Elive

A light-weight Linux distribution featuring the Enlightenment desktop, designed to be simple and suitable for new Linux users who want a fully functional environment.


Emdebian Grip

A small-footprint distribution based on and compatible with Debian, intended for use on resource-limited embedded systems.[13]


Finnix

A small system-administration Live CD that is available for multiple architectures[14]


gLinux

gLinux is a Linux Distro used for Google Employees.


gNewSense

Originally based on Ubuntu and later upon Debian, and developed with sponsorship from the Free Software Foundation. Its goal is user-friendliness, but with all proprietary (e.g. binary blobs) and non-free software removed.


grml

Live CD for system recovery[15]


HandyLinux

Designed for senior citizens running old computers for which Windows have become too slow[16]


Kali Linux

A completely customizable distribution used for penetration testing. Kali is based on Debian and is used mostly by security experts.[17] Originally named BackTrack (named after the homonym class of backtracking algorithms), it is developed by Offensive Security.[18] In March 2013, the Offensive Security team rebuilt BackTrack on Debian and released it under the name Kali Linux.[19]


Kali NetHunter

Mobile version of Kali Linux available for rooted and non-rooted devices.


Kanotix

An installable live DVD/CD for desktop usage using KDE and LXDE, focusing on convenient scripts and GUIs for ease of use.[20]


LEAF Project

The Linux Embedded Appliance Framework. A tiny primarily floppy-based distribution for routers, firewalls and other appliances.[21]


Libranet

A discontinued operating system based on Debian.


LiMux

An ISO 9241 industry workplace certified Linux distribution, deployed at the City of Munich, Germany.[22]


LMDE

A Debian-based version of Linux Mint that does not use any elements of Ubuntu linux, maintained to ensure continuity should Ubuntu stop being maintained or other issue affecting the core Mint distribution.[23]


Maemo

A development platform for hand held devices such as the Nokia N800, N810, and Nokia N900 Internet Tablets and other Linux kernel–based devices.[24]


MEPIS

A discontinued OS that focused on ease of use. Significant derivatives include antiX and MX Linux.


MintPPC

For PowerPC computers. Although MintPPC uses some Linux Mint Debian Edition code, it is not Linux Mint.[25]


Musix GNU+Linux

Intended for music production, graphic design, audio, video editing, and other tasks. It is built with only free software.[26]


MX Linux

A midweight OS based on Debian Stable with core components from antiX and using Xfce, offering simple configuration, high stability, solid performance and medium-sized footprint.[27]


NepaLinux

A Debian- and Morphix-based distribution focused for desktop usage in Nepali language computing.[28]


OpenZaurus

Debian packages and ROM image for the Sharp Zaurus PDA. Replaced by Ångström distribution.[29]


Pardus

Developed by Turkish National Research Institute of Electronics and Cryptology. Prior to 2013 it used PISI as the package manager, with COMAR as the configuration framework. Starting with Pardus 2013, it is Debian-based.


Parrot OS

A Linux distribution based on Debian used by penetration testers.


Parsix[30]

Optimized for personal computers and laptops. Built on top of Debian testing branch and comes with security support.[31]


PelicanHPC

Dedicated to setting up a computer cluster.[32]


PureOS

A Linux distribution based on Debian with a focus on privacy, security, and convenience.[33][34][35][36]


Q4OS

A light-weight Linux distribution with Trinity and Plasma desktop environments.[37]


Raspberry Pi OS

Desktop-oriented distribution, formerly known as Raspbian. Developed by the Raspberry Pi Foundation as the official OS for their family of low-power Raspberry Pi single-board computers.


SolydXK

Xfce and KDE desktop focused on stability, security and ease of use.[38]


SparkyLinux

A Debian-based Linux distribution which provides ready to use, out of the box operating system with a set of slightly customized lightweight desktops. Sparky is targeted to all the computer's users who want replace existing, proprietary driven OS to an open-sourced..


Sunwah Linux

A Chinese Linux distribution[39]


Tails

Tails or The Amnesic Incognito Live System' is aimed at preserving privacy and anonymity, with all outgoing connections forced to go through Tor.[40]


TurnKey Linux

Open source project developing a family of free, Debian-based appliances optimized for ease of use in server-type usage scenarios.[41] Based on Debian since 2012; previously based on Ubuntu.


TrueNAS

Designed for network-attached storage (NAS) and derived from the FreeBSD-based FreeNAS (later known as TrueNAS Core or TrueNAS Legacy).


Twister OS

Raspberry Pi OS based distribution using Xfce with themes based on other OSes intended for the Raspberry Pi, RK3399 CPU, and x86-64 architecture.


Univention Corporate Server

Enterprise distribution with integrated IT infrastructure and identity management system by the company Univention GmbH, Germany. A full version for up to 5 users for tests and for private use can be downloaded for free.[42]


Webconverger

Debian Live-based browser only distribution, similar to ChromeOS. However based on Firefox and dwm, with no user sign-in, no special hardware required and designed for public places.[43]


Vyatta

Commercial open source network operating system includes routing, firewall, VPN, intrusion prevention and more. Designed to be an open source Cisco replacement.[44]


VyOS

Free routing platform. Because VyOS is run on standard amd64, i586 and ARM systems, it is able to be used as a router and firewall platform for cloud deployments.

Ubuntu-based[edit]
Ubuntu family tree
Ubuntu (named after the Nguni philosophy of ubuntu) is a distribution based on Debian, designed to have regular releases, a consistent user experience and commercial support on both desktops and servers.

Current official derivatives[edit]
These Ubuntu variants, also known as Ubuntu flavours, simply install a set of packages different from the original Ubuntu, but since they draw additional packages and updates from the same repositories as Ubuntu, all of the same software is available for each of them.[45][46]



Distribution
Description


Edubuntu

A complete Linux based operating system that was targeted for primary and secondary education. Outdated versions are freely available with community-based support. The Edubuntu community is built on the ideas enshrined in the Edubuntu Manifesto: that software, especially for education, should be available free of charge and that software tools should be usable by people in their local language and despite any disabilities.[47]


Kubuntu

An official derivative of Ubuntu Linux using KDE instead of the GNOME (or Unity) desktop environment used by default in Ubuntu.[48]


Lubuntu

An official derivative of the Ubuntu operating system that is "lighter, less resource hungry and more energy-efficient", using the LXQt desktop environment (used LXDE before 18.10).[49][50][51]


Ubuntu Budgie

An official derivative of Ubuntu using Budgie.


Ubuntu Cinnamon

An official derivative of Ubuntu using the Cinnamon desktop environment.[52]


Ubuntu Kylin

An official derivative aimed at the Chinese market.


Ubuntu MATE

An official derivative of Ubuntu using MATE, a desktop environment forked from the now-defunct GNOME 2 code base, with an emphasis on the desktop metaphor.[53]


Ubuntu Server

An official derivative made for use in servers & IBM mainframes. Ubuntu Server handles mail, controls printers, acts as a fileserver, can host LAMP and more.[54]


Ubuntu Studio

Based on Ubuntu, providing open-source applications for multimedia creation aimed at the audio, video and graphic editors.[55]


Ubuntu Unity

An official derivative of Ubuntu using the Unity desktop environment.[56][57]


Xubuntu

An official derivative of Ubuntu using Xfce. Xubuntu is intended for use on less-powerful computers or those who seek a highly efficient desktop environment on faster systems, and uses mostly GTK applications.[58]

Discontinued official derivatives[edit]


Distribution
Description


Gobuntu

Gobuntu was an official derivative of the Ubuntu operating system, aiming to provide a distribution consisting entirely of free software. It was officially announced by Mark Shuttleworth on July 10, 2007, and daily builds of Gobuntu 7.10 began to be publicly released. The project ended around the release of 8.04 and has since merged into mainline Ubuntu as a 'free software' option.[59]


Mythbuntu

Based on Ubuntu and MythTV, providing applications for recording TV and acting as a media center.[60] On 4 November 2016 the development team announced the end of Mythbuntu as a separate distribution, citing insufficient developers.


Ubuntu GNOME

Formerly an official Ubuntu variant,[61] but since the main Ubuntu 17.10, which uses GNOME Shell as its default desktop and GDM as its display manager, this distro has been merged into mainline releases.[62]


Ubuntu JeOS

"Just Enough OS" – was described as "an efficient variant [...] configured specifically for virtual appliances".[63] Since the release of Ubuntu 8.10 it has been included as an option as part of the standard Ubuntu Server Edition.


Ubuntu Mobile

An embedded operating system designed for use on mobile devices. The operating system will use Hildon from maemo as its graphical frontend. Ubuntu Touch is a successor to Ubuntu Mobile.


Ubuntu Netbook Edition

Netbook Edition was an official derivative of Ubuntu designed for netbooks using the Intel Atom processor. Starting from Ubuntu 11.04, Ubuntu Netbook Edition has been merged into the desktop edition.[64]


Ubuntu TV

Designed for use with TVs.[65]

Unofficial derivatives[edit]
Unofficial variants and derivatives are not controlled or guided by Canonical Ltd. and generally have different goals in mind.



Distribution
Description


BackBox

BackBox is a Linux distribution based on Ubuntu. It has been developed to perform penetration tests and security assessments. Designed to be fast, easy to use and provide a minimal yet complete desktop environment, thanks to its own software repositories, always being updated to the latest stable version of the most used and best known ethical hacking tools.[66]


Bodhi Linux

An Ubuntu-based Linux distribution featuring the Moksha Desktop environment and targeting users who want a minimum of preinstalled software or low system requirements.[67]


Cub Linux

Ubuntu-based distribution designed to mimic the desktop appearance and functionality of ChromeOS.[68][69][70]


dyne:bolic

Live CD geared toward multimedia (audio and video) production, but comes with other non-media specific application (e.g. word processor, desktop publisher)[71]


EasyPeasy

Fork of Ubuntu designed for netbooks[72]


Eeebuntu

Specifically for the Eee PC range of netbooks, based on Debian. Also rebranded as Aurora OS.[73]


Element OS

Based on Xubuntu, made for Home theater PCs[74]


elementary OS

A distribution focusing mainly on non-technical users, has a pay what you want model.[75]


Emmabuntüs

Based on Xubuntu designed to facilitate the repacking of computers donated to Emmaüs Communities.[76]


GalliumOS

A Linux distribution for ChromeOS devices by the community-supported GalliumOS project. Gallium is based on Xubuntu and maintains compatibility with the Ubuntu repositories.[77]


GendBuntu

A version adapted for use by France's National Gendarmerie.


Goobuntu

An Ubuntu-based distribution that was used internally by Google (until changing to non-Ubuntu, Debian-based GLinux); not available outside of Google


gOS

Used the GNOME desktop environment with user interface enhancements to make it work more like Mac OS X, it also featured Google Apps, Picasa, Google Gadgets and other web-based applications, and came with Wine 1.0 pre-installed. Now discontinued.


Hannah Montana Linux

A Kubuntu-based distribution released in 2009, featuring a KDE 4.2 GUI and a Disney Channel series Hannah Montana theme.


Joli OS

Joli OS (formerly named Jolicloud) is in development and Pre-beta testing. Joli OS is built upon Debian and Ubuntu 9.10, but is tweaked to be more suitable for computers that have weaker specifications in terms of disk storage, memory and screen size. It is designed to run on relatively low-powered netbook computers.[78]


Karoshi

A formerly PCLinuxOS-based distribution designed for use in schools.[79]


KDE neon

Focused on the development of KDE. The emphasis is on bleeding edge software packages sourced directly from KDE and offers programmers early access to new features, but potentially at the cost of greater susceptibility to software bugs.[80]


LiMux

A project by the city council of Munich, Germany


Linux Caixa Mágica

Portuguese Linux distribution.[81]


Linux Lite

The purpose of Linux Lite is to introduce Windows users to Linux, and provide them with a comfortable and useful user experience. It is designed to be simple and suitable for new Linux users who want a lightweight, highly responsive, and fully functional environment.[82]


Linux Mint

Linux Mint synchronizes its release-cycle with Ubuntu's long-term support, and is tailored to user-friendliness for desktop users.[83] Linux Mint Debian Edition (LMDE) is Mint's Debian stable based version. Its purpose is to use Debian base packages/kernel under the hood should Ubuntu ever disappear. It's also used by Mint developers to develop their Cinnamon desktop.


LinuxMCE

Linux Media Center Edition, a Kubuntu-based distribution that provides in-depth HTPC functionality as well as home automation.[84]


LinuxTLE

A Thai Linux distribution. Not maintained.[85]


LliureX

A distribution by the Generalitat Valenciana[86]


LXLE Linux

A light-weight Linux distribution based on Lubuntu, using the LXDE desktop environment.[87]


MAX

Stands for MAdrid LinuX. Used in education.[88]


Maya OS

A distribution developed by Indian Ministry of Defence.[89]


Molinux

Ubuntu based initiative to introduce the Castile-La Mancha community in Spain to the information society.[90]


Netrunner

Kubuntu based distribution with complete software and codecs installed, developed by Blue Systems (also sponsoring Kubuntu and LinuxMintKDE).[91]


Nova

Cuban state-sponsored distribution developed at the University of Information Science, Havana. Formerly based on Gentoo.


OpenGEU

Ubuntu based distribution with Enlightenment window manager, previously known as Geubuntu.[92]


Peppermint OS

A light-weight LXDE distribution for cloud applications through its own Ice Framework using the Chromium Web Browser. Based on Lubuntu[93]


Pinguy OS

An Ubuntu-based distro for people that have never used Linux before or for people that want an out-of-the-box working OS without having to tweak a fresh installation of Ubuntu or other Ubuntu-based distro.[94]


Pop!_OS

An Ubuntu-based distro developed by System76 predominantly for use on hardware that they manufacture.


Poseidon Linux

For academic and scientific use. Based on Ubuntu, but enhanced by GIS/maps, numerical modelling, 2D/3D/4D visualization, statistics, tools for creating simple and complex graphics, programming languages.


Sabily

Ubuntu based distribution for Muslims (formerly Ubuntu Muslim Edition)[95] Unmaintained


SuperGamer

A Live DVD distribution focused on gaming formerly based on VectorLinux.


Trisquel GNU/Linux

Fully free-software system without proprietary software or firmware and uses the Linux-libre kernel deblob script, based on Ubuntu LTS Releases[96]


UberStudent

For higher education and advanced secondary students, those who teach them, and lifelong learners[97]


Ututo

Ututo UL ("Ubuntu-Libre") Distributes Simusol, a system to simulate Solar Energy projects, returned to the heart of the project. Discontinued.[98]


Vinux

A Linux distribution designed for visually impaired users[99]


Wubuntu

Former LinuxFX. Also known as "Windows Ubuntu". The distribution aims to imitate Microsoft operating system Windows 11.[100][101]


Zorin OS

Zorin OS is a user-friendly distribution that can emulate Microsoft Windows or macOS. It is meant for users unfamiliar with Linux.[102]

Knoppix-based[edit]
Knoppix family tree
Knoppix (a portmanteau of the surname Knopper from Klaus Knopper and Unix) itself is based on Debian. It is a live distribution, with automated hardware configuration and a wide choice of software, which is decompressed as it loads from the drive.[103]



Distribution
Description


Damn Small Linux

A small Linux distro designed to run on older hardware. It is commonly used on virtual machines due to low memory requirements.[104]


Feather Linux

Boots from either a CD or a USB flash drive. Uses Knoppix-based hardware detection and the Fluxbox window manager.[105]

Pacman-based[edit]
Pacman is a package manager that is capable of resolving dependencies and automatically downloading and installing all necessary packages. It is primarily developed and used by Arch Linux and its derivatives.

Arch Linux-based[edit]
Arch Linux is an independently developed, x86-64 general-purpose Linux distribution that strives to provide the latest stable versions of most software by following a rolling-release model. The default installation is a minimal base system—configured by the user to only add what is purposely required.



Distribution
Description


Antergos

Antergos is a discontinued Linux distribution based on Arch Linux.


Arch Linux ARM

Port of Arch Linux for ARM processors.


ArchBang

Based on Arch Linux, but also provides Live CDs with working system and graphical installation scripts; uses i3 as default window manager.


Artix Linux

Based on Arch Linux, but using Dinit, OpenRC, Runit, or s6 as init system instead of systemd.


ArchLabs

ArchLabs is a discontinued Linux distribution based on Arch Linux, with a custom installer, offers many choices of desktop environments and window managers.


BlackArch

A cybersecurity-focused OS based on Arch Linux. It is designed to test security and run penetration tests. It includes window managers preconfigured, but no desktop environment.


EndeavourOS

Continuation of Antergos, featuring a graphical installer capable of installing KDE Plasma (default, offline), Budgie, Cinnamon, Deepin, GNOME, i3, Xfce, LXQt, and MATE.


Garuda Linux

A distribution based on gaming.[106]


LinHES

LinHES (Linux Home Entertainment Server) designed for use on home theater PCs (HTPCs), providing applications for recording TV and acting as a sound and video center.


Manjaro

Based on Arch Linux, using its own repositories and ships with either Xfce, Plasma, GNOME, or the CLI as the default desktop environment. Additional community-driven editions are available that use MATE, Cinnamon, Openbox, Awesome, i3, BSPWM, or Budgie as a base.


Parabola GNU/Linux-libre

An Arch derivative without any blobs, plus various added packages. Packages are also built for ARMv7 in addition to i686 and x64. MATE and text-mode distributions available.


SteamOS

Arch-based and gaming-focused distribution developed by Valve and designed for the Steam digital distribution platform and Steam Deck. Before version 3.0, was previously based on Debian.


SystemRescue

Linux System rescue toolkit. Previously based on Gentoo, it has been based on Arch Linux since version 6.0.0

Other Pacman-based[edit]


Distribution
Description


Chakra Linux

Originally derived from Arch Linux, with the latest KDE. For now uses the Pacman utility for package management. Strives to be Qt-only. Discontinued.[107]


Frugalware Linux

A general purpose Linux distribution designed for intermediate users. Has some influences from Slackware, and uses a heavily modified version of pacman, Pacman-G2, a fork of a cvs version of the complete rewrite of Pacman-G1 by Aurelien Foret (the old monolithic Pacman-G1 is written by Judd Vinet). The packages are tar archives compressed using xz.[108]


KaOS

An independent 64-bit only rolling-release Linux distribution inspired by Arch that features the latest KDE Plasma environment and the Qt toolkit.[109]


Hyperbola GNU/Linux-libre

Originally a free software derivate from Arch with usage of Debian patchsets, Hyperbola is now an independent Linux distribution without any blobs, without systemd support and with OpenRC as its default init system. Packages are built for i686 and x64. Hyperbola uses the long-term support model like Debian and its heading towards being a fully BSD-descendant operating-system named HyperbolaBSD.

RPM-based[edit]
Red Hat family tree
Red Hat Linux and SUSE Linux were the original major distributions that used the .rpm file format, which today is used in several package management systems. Both of these were later divided into commercial and community-supported distributions. Red Hat Linux was divided into a community-supported but Red Hat-sponsored distribution named Fedora, and a commercially supported distribution called Red Hat Enterprise Linux, whereas SUSE Linux was divided into openSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise.

Fedora-based[edit]
Fedora family tree
Fedora is a community supported distribution. It aims to provide the latest software while maintaining a completely Free Software system.[110]



Distribution
Description


Asahi Linux

Port of Linux to Apple silicon-powered Macs.


Amazon Linux 2

Amazon Linux 2 is available as an Amazon Machine Image (AMI) for use on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2). It is also available as a Docker container image and as a virtual machine image for use on Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM), Oracle VM VirtualBox, Microsoft Hyper-V, and VMware ESXi


Bazzite

A atomic gaming focused distribution developed with Universal Blue. It is similar to SteamOS.


Berry Linux

A medium-sized Fedora-based distribution that provides support in Japanese and English.


BLAG Linux and GNU

A completely free software distribution.


CentOS Stream

Community-supported Linux distribution designed as a midstream between Fedora and RHEL, and well suited for servers.[111]


EnGarde Secure Linux

Server-only Linux distribution designed to be secure.[112]


Fuduntu

Designed to fit in somewhere between Fedora and Ubuntu.


Hanthana

Designed to cater the needs of Sri Lankan computer users who are unable to access Internet frequently, with many most-wanted applications built in.


Korora

Initially aimed at easy installation of a Gentoo system by using install scripts instead of manual configuration. Now based on Fedora.


Linpus Linux

Focused on the Chinese market, along with Linpus Lite focused on the netbook market.


Linux XP

Fedora-based shareware distribution designed to imitate the Windows environment using GNOME.


MeeGo

Built by Intel and Nokia, intended for mobile phones (mainly Nokia N9) and tablets. It is based on Moblin together with Maemo.


Moblin

Built around the Intel Atom processor; supplanted by Meego when Intel and (temporarily) Nokia combined activities


Network Security Toolkit

A live CD/DVD with security and networking tools to perform routine security and networking diagnostic and monitoring tasks.


Qubes OS

Focused on security for desktop users. Based on an "ancient" Fedora release which is said to be upgraded under YUM.


Red Star OS

A North Korean Linux distribution developed at the Korea Computer Center (KCC). It is offered only in a Korean language edition, localized with North Korean terminology and spelling.


Russian Fedora Remix

A remix of Fedora.


Sailfish OS

Built by Jolla, Sailfish OS is a 4th generation mobile Linux system ported to a line of Sony Xperia handsets, with community ports available to alternative devices.


Sugar-on-a-Stick Linux

An educational operating system, originally designed for the One-Laptop-Per-Child project.


Yellow Dog Linux

For the PowerPC platform.

RHEL-based[edit]
See also: Red Hat Enterprise Linux derivatives and Commercial products based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux
Red Hat Enterprise Linux is a commercial open-source Linux distribution developed by Red Hat for the commercial market.



Distribution
Description


AlmaLinux

A 100% community owned and governed alternative CentOS as a Red Hat Enterprise Linux rebuild. Governed by the AlmaLinux OS Foundation.


Asianux

A Linux distribution co-developed between Red Flag Software Co., Ltd., Miracle Linux Corp. and Haansoft, INC., focused on Chinese, Japanese and Korean support.


CentOS

A community distribution, 100% functionally compatible with RHEL. Joined Red Hat in 2014.[113] Terminated by Red Hat in 2024[111] in favor of CentOS Stream, a distribution positioned upstream of RHEL. AlmaLinux and Rocky Linux are two continuations of the CentOS distribution.


ClearOS

A Linux distribution designed for use in small and medium enterprises.


Fermi Linux LTS

Based on Scientific Linux.[114]


Miracle Linux

A Linux distribution developed by Cybertrust Japan Co., Ltd., aims to be compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.


Oracle Linux

Supported by Oracle. Aims to be fully compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.


Red Flag Linux

A Linux distribution developed in China and optimized for the Chinese market. Based on Asianux.


Rocks Cluster Distribution

A Linux distribution for building a High-Performance Computing computer cluster, with a recent release supporting Cloud computing. It is based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux but with extensions to support large multi-node heterogeneous systems for clusters (HPC), Cloud, and Data Warehousing (in development).


Rocky Linux

A Linux distribution that is currently in development by the CentOS founder, Gregory Kurtzer, aims to be compatible with Red Hat Enterprise Linux.


Scientific Linux

A discontinued Linux distribution co-developed by Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), which aims to be compatible with and based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

openSUSE-based[edit]
openSUSE is a community-developed Linux distribution, sponsored by SUSE. It maintains a strict policy of ensuring all code in the standard installs will be from FOSS solutions, including Linux kernel Modules. SUSE's enterprise Linux products are all based on the codebase that comes out of the openSUSE project.



Distribution
Description


GeckoLinux

A distribution with a focus on polish and out-of-the-box desktop usability. It is available in Static and Rolling versions, based on openSUSE Leap and Tumbleweed.


SUSE Linux Enterprise

Comes in two variations. SUSE Linux Enterprise Desktop (previously branded Novell Linux Desktop) is a desktop-oriented Linux distribution supplied by SUSE and targeted at the enterprise market. SUSE Linux Enterprise Server is a server-oriented Linux distribution targeted at the business market.

Mandriva-based[edit]
Mandriva Linux is open-source distribution (with exceptions), discontinued in 2011. The first release was named Mandrake Linux and based on Red Hat Linux (version 5.1) and KDE 1 in July 1998. It had since moved away from Red Hat's distribution and became a completely separate distribution. The name was changed to Mandriva, which included a number of original tools, mostly to ease system configuration. Mandriva Linux was the brainchild of Gaël Duval, who wanted to focus on ease of use for new users. The last stable version was in 2011. Mandriva's developers moved to Mageia[115] and OpenMandriva.[116]



Distribution
Description


Mageia

A community Linux distribution initially forked from Mandriva Linux in response to the discontinuation of free versions of Mandriva Linux.


ROSA Linux

A Russian distribution available in three different editions: ROSA Desktop Fresh, ROSA Enterprise Desktop and ROSA Enterprise Linux Server, with the latter two aiming at commercial users. Its desktop editions come bundled with proprietary software such as Adobe Flash Player, multimedia codecs and Steam.


OpenMandriva

A fork of Mandriva Linux by the OpenMandriva Association.

Other RPM-based[edit]


Distribution
Description


ALT Linux

ALT Linux is a set of RPM-based operating systems built on top of the Linux kernel and Sisyphus packages repository. ALT Linux has been developed collectively by ALT Linux Team developers community and ALT Linux Ltd.


Caldera OpenLinux

A Linux distribution originally introduced by Caldera and later developed by its subsidiary Caldera Systems. It was later developed by Caldera International (which bought SCO and was renamed The SCO Group). The distribution is no longer produced. Last release: 3.1.1 – Jan. 30, 2002


PCLinuxOS

A rolling release Linux Live CD distribution. Originally based on Mandrake 9.2. Later rebased on Mandriva 2007.


Red Hat Linux

Split into Fedora Core and Red Hat Enterprise Linux. The last official release of the unsplit distribution was Red Hat Linux 9 in March 2003.


SUSE Linux

Split into openSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise.


Think Blue Linux

A port of Linux to IBM S/390 (later, zSeries) mainframe computers, done by the Millenux subsidiary of German company Thinking Objects Software GmbH. Discontinued in 2006.


Turbolinux

Originally based on Red Hat Linux.


Vine Linux

A Japanese distribution originally based on Red Hat Linux.

Gentoo-based[edit]
Main article: List of Gentoo Linux derivatives
Gentoo family tree
Gentoo is a distribution designed to have highly optimized and frequently updated software.[117] Distributions based on Gentoo use the Portage package management system with emerge[118] or one of the alternative package managers.



Distribution
Description


Calculate Linux

Calculate Linux is a family of distributions.


ChromeOS[119]

Google's Linux-based operating system used on various Chromebooks, Chromeboxes and tablet computers. It is primarily Internet-based, launching each app within the Chrome browser. The OS features a user interface that looks very similar to Chrome instead of GNOME, Cinnamon, LXQt, Xfce, etc.


ChromiumOS

Free and open-source version of ChromeOS.


Clip OS

Created by ANSSI, the National Cybersecurity Agency of France and based on hardened Gentoo, it's aimed to secure sensitive information which meets the needs of the French Administration.


Container Linux

Linux distribution by CoreOS designed for clustered and containerized deployments with update subscription


Funtoo Linux

Discontinued derivative created by Daniel Robbins, founder of Gentoo. Designed to improve upon core Gentoo technologies.


Pentoo

Penetration-testing Live CD.


Sabayon Linux

Discontinued Italian made Linux distribution based on Funtoo. It followed the "out of the box" philosophy, aiming to give the user a wide number of applications ready to use and a self-configured operating system. Like Gentoo, Sabayon used the rolling release model; it used a customized version of Red Hat's Anaconda Installer and included a Media Center application.

Slackware-based[edit]
Slackware family tree
Slackware is a highly customizable distribution that stresses ease of maintenance and reliability over cutting-edge software and automated tools. It is generally considered a distribution for advanced users.



Distribution
Description


Absolute Linux

A Light-weight Linux distribution based on Slackware


Austrumi Linux

Slackware-based Live CD distribution. Dormant as of 2023.[120]


Damn Vulnerable Linux

Damn Vulnerable Linux (DVL) is a discontinued Linux distribution geared toward computer security students.


KateOS

A desktop distribution aimed at intermediate users. It uses Xfce as its default desktop environment. No longer in development.


MuLinux

Floppy-based Linux distribution with replaceable modules


NimbleX

Completely customizable through the NimbleX website. Now no longer producing new versions.


Platypux

A French Linux distribution of the Slackware family.


Porteus

A small and portable Linux distro focused on speed.


Salix OS

Originally a fork of Zenwalk, Salix is a complete Linux distribution fully backwards compatible with Slackware. It uses Xfce, KDE, LXDE, Fluxbox or Ratpoison as its default desktop environment. Salix OS is available as 32 and 64bit version, and also as Live CD versions.


Sentry Firewall

A firewall, server, or intrusion detection system distribution


Slackintosh

An unofficial port of Slackware to the PowerPC architecture


Slax

A live CD which aims to provide a complete desktop for general use for low-powered computers. Its download size is about 300 MB, almost the same as Puppy Linux's. It can run from RAM, from Live CD, USB or hard drive. Permanent installation of Slax is not recommended or supported; it is designed for "live" use only. Also can be run from a USB flash drive. Originally based on Slackware, then switched to Debian since v9.2.1. Returned to a Slackware base as of v15.0.


Topologilinux

Designed to run from within Microsoft Windows, Topologilinux can be installed without any changes to the user's hard disk. Outdated.


VectorLinux

A lightweight Linux distribution designed to be easy to use even for new users. Generally considered well-suited for older hardware.


Zenwalk

Originally a minimal version of Slackware, Zenwalk has evolved into a very different operating system; however, compatibility with Slackware is still maintained.


ZipSlack

A lightweight and portable version of Slackware.

Android-based[edit]
Android is a mobile operating system bought and currently being developed by Google, based on a Google modified Linux kernel and designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.[121] Despite Android's core mobile focus, some laptop oriented derivatives like Android-x86 have come out over the years since its initial release.



Distribution
Description


/e/

/e/ (also known as /e/ OS and /e/OS, formerly Eelo) is an Android-based mobile operating system and associated online services. The operating system is a fork of LineageOS and Android.


Android-x86

Android-x86 is an open source project which produces an unofficial port of the Android mobile operating system. It is developed by the Open Handset Alliance, and is made to run on devices powered by x86 processors, rather than RISC-based ARM chips. Respective mods CyanogenMod and LineageOS for x86 were and are available.


CalyxOS

CalyxOS is an operating system for smartphones based on Android with mostly free and open-source software. It is produced by the Calyx Institute as part of its mission to "defend online privacy, security and accessibility."


CopperheadOS

CopperheadOS is a mobile operating system for smartphones, based on the Android mobile platform. It adds privacy and security features to the official releases of the Android Open Source Project by Google.


CyanogenMod

A discontinued open-source operating system for mobile devices, based on the Android mobile platform. LineageOS is an actively maintained fork of CyanogenMod.[122][123]


DivestOS

DivestOS is a free operating system (OS) based on the Android mobile platform. It is a soft fork of LineageOS that aims to increase security and privacy, and support older devices. As much as possible it removes proprietary Android components and includes only free-software.


Fire OS

An Android-based mobile operating system produced by Amazon for its Fire Phone and Kindle Fire range of tablets, Echo and Echo Dot, and other content delivery devices like Fire TV.


GrapheneOS

GrapheneOS (formerly Android Hardening or AndroidHardening) is an Android-based, open source, privacy and security-focused mobile operating system for selected Google Pixel smartphones.


LineageOS

A free and open-source operating system for smartphones, tablet computers, and set-top boxes, based on the Android mobile platform.


OmniROM

OmniROM is an open-source operating system for smartphones and tablet computers, based on the Android mobile platform. It involves a number of prominent developers from other projects, including the discontinued CyanogenMod operating system.[124]


Paranoid Android

Paranoid Android is an open-source operating system for smartphones and tablet computers, based on the Android mobile platform.


Remix OS

Remix OS was a computer operating system for personal computers with x86 and ARM architectures that, prior to discontinuation of development, shipped with a number of 1st- and 3rd-party devices. Remix OS allowed PC users to run Android mobile apps on any compatible Intel-based PC.


Replicant

A free operating system (OS) based on the Android mobile platform that aims to replace all proprietary Android components with free-software counterparts.


Resurrection Remix OS

Resurrection Remix OS, abbreviated as RR, is a free and open-source operating system for smartphones and tablet computers, based on the Android mobile platform.


Source-based[edit]


Distribution
Description


CRUX

CRUX is a lightweight, x86-64-optimized Linux distribution targeted at experienced users. The focus is "keep it simple", which is reflected in a simple tar.xz-based package system, BSD-style initscripts, and a relatively small collection of trimmed packages. Inspiration for Arch Linux.


GoboLinux

A Linux distribution which redefines the file system hierarchy by installing everything belonging to one application in one folder under /Programs, and using symlinks from /System and its subfolders to point to the proper files.


Linux from Scratch

A do it yourself distribution built from the ground up using instructions in a book of the same name. Has no package manager, as the user is expected to build each package manually from source by following the book instructions.


Source Mage

A source code-based Linux distribution, descended from Sorcerer.


T2 SDE

A System Development Environment for building a Linux distribution.

Other distributions[edit]
The following distributions have not been categorized under the preceding sections.



Distribution
Description


4MLinux

A lightweight Linux distribution made for both 32-bit and 64-bit. When installing programs with the distribution, the distribution will retrieve the Windows version rather than the Linux version due to it coming pre-installed with Wine (A compatibility layer for Windows applications), and not having any package manager.


Alpine Linux

A security-oriented, lightweight Linux distribution based on musl and BusyBox. Has a derivative, postmarketOS, for mobile devices.


Android

A open source operating system that uses a modified Linux kernel, it is primarily developed by Google. For a list of Android-based operating systems, See: List of custom Android distributions


CHAOS

a small (6 MB) Linux distribution designed for creating ad hoc computer clusters.


Chimera Linux

An independent Linux distribution that uses FreeBSD utilities, LLVM and Clang for compiling software, dinit init system, and musl libc.


Clear Linux OS

Intel's rolling-release Linux distribution, optimized for Intel's own processors for performance and security.


DD-WRT

Embedded firewall Linux distribution.


Dragora GNU/Linux-Libre

A Linux distribution written entirely from scratch[125] and sharing some similarities with Slackware. Approved by the GNU Project as a free operating system.[126]


ELinOS

Linux distribution for embedded systems by SYSGO. ELinOS focuses on industrial application and provides real-time extensions.


Firefox OS

A discontinued open-source operating system – made for smartphones, tablet computers and smart TVs – designed by Mozilla and external contributors.


fli4l

A router and firewall Linux distribution[127]


Foresight Linux

A rolling release Linux distribution built around the Conary package manager.


GeeXboX

Live CD media center Linux distribution, mainly to play special-encoded video files (e.g.: .ogg, XVID) on home theater.


GNU Guix System

A distribution built around the GNU Guix package manager, which provides purely functional package management with build automation, build isolation, easy system upgrades and rollbacks, and an emphasis on free software.[128] Supports amongst others unprivileged package management and per-user profiles.


Jlime

Linux distribution for the HP Jornada 6xx and 7xx and NEC MobilePro 900(c) handhelds.


KaiOS

A mobile operating system based on Linux, developed by KaiOS Technologies, a US-based company.


Kwort

A distribution originally based on CRUX. Contrary to CRUX, the user does not need to compile a new kernel.


Lightweight Portable Security (LPS)

A CRUX-based distribution created by the United States Department of Defense that boots entirely in RAM[129][130]


LinuxConsole

Independently developed lightweight distribution for old computers made with causal users and youth in mind.


Linux for PlayStation 2

Sony Computer Entertainment Linux distribution released officially for the PlayStation 2 video game console.


Linux Router Project

Embedded networking appliance progenitor (defunct).


MeeGo

A discontinued Linux distribution hosted by the Linux Foundation, using source code from the operating systems Moblin (produced by Intel) and Maemo (produced by Nokia).


MkLinux

A legacy Linux distribution for PowerPC systems that runs the Linux kernel as a server on top of the Mach microkernel.


Nitix

Developed by Net Integration Technologies Inc., Nitix claims to be the first autonomic Linux kernel–based server operating system.


NixOS

Declarative Linux distribution with atomic upgrades and rollbacks built on top of Nix package manager. Any package build is able to be freely edited and rebuilt from source. An official binary cache is also available for unmodified packages.


MontaVista Linux

Embedded distribution by MontaVista Software.


OpenWrt

A router and firewall Linux distribution, also other embedded systems, a lot of routing options via opkg available.


postmarketOS

A security-oriented, lightweight distribution for mobile devices.


Prevas Industrial Linux

Embedded systems customizable Linux distribution by Prevas.


Puppy Linux

A mini Linux distribution which runs well under low-end PCs – even under 32 MB RAM.


rPath

A distribution built around the Conary package manager. Discontinued.


SliTaz

With less than 40 MB a very small Live-Distribution, which uses 256 MB RAM (or with a special edition only 24 MB[131]) for a complete GUI.


Smallfoot

Embedded, gaming and point-of-sale Linux distribution developed by the Santa Cruz Operation (SCO), formerly Caldera International and Caldera Systems – based on Caldera OpenLinux 3.x and 4.x binaries.


SmoothWall

A router and firewall Linux distribution.


paldo

Independently developed desktop operating system and package manager (upkg) with a rolling release format and standard Gnome environment.


Sailfish OS

A Linux-based operating system based on open source projects such as Mer and including a closed source UI. The project is being developed by the Finnish company Jolla.


Solus

Desktop Linux distribution offering Budgie, GNOME, MATE and KDE Plasma desktop environments, eopkg for package management.


Tinfoil Hat Linux

Bootable floppy Linux distribution focusing on extreme security.


Tiny Core Linux

A minimalist (around 10 MB) Linux system focusing on providing a base system with BusyBox, FLTK and other minimalist software.


Tizen

A Linux-based mobile operating system backed by the Linux Foundation but developed and used primarily by Samsung Electronics.


tomsrtbt

Root boot from floppy disk. Last update May 2002.


Void Linux

An independent Linux distribution based on the XBPS package management system and runit, without systemd dependency.

Historical distributions[edit]


Distribution
Description


MCC Interim Linux

Possibly the first Linux distribution, created by the Manchester Computing Centre in February 1992.


Softlanding Linux System

One of the earliest Linux distributions, developed from 1992 to 1994; Slackware was originally based on it.


Yggdrasil Linux/GNU/X

One of the oldest Linux distributions (December 1992), not updated since 1995.

See also[edit]

Free and open-source software portalLinux portal
Comparison of Linux distributions
Comparison of netbook-oriented Linux distributions
DistroWatch
Linux on PowerPC
Linux on IBM Z
List of live CDs
List of router and firewall distributions
References[edit]


^ "Linux Distributions Timeline". FabioLolix. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2021.

^ "Ubuntu Manpage: deb - Debian binary package format". Manpages.ubuntu.com. Archived from the original on 2013-06-07. Retrieved 2013-07-05.

^ "Ubuntu Manpage: dpkg - package manager for Debian". ManPages.Ubuntu.com. Archived from the original on 2013-06-07. Retrieved 2013-07-05.

^ "архив". old.computerra.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 2024-10-10. Retrieved 2019-11-21.

^ "Home - FSTEC Russia". fstec.ru. Archived from the original on 2013-02-18. Retrieved 2019-11-21.

^ "Сертификаты соответствия". 2018-03-04. Archived from the original on 2018-03-04. Retrieved 2019-11-21.

^ "Indian Government's BOSS Operating System Set To Replace Windows, Ward Off Hackers". www.ibtimes.com. 16 September 2015. Archived from the original on 2023-12-11. Retrieved 2019-07-22.

^ "Canaima website". Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "The story of a failure (Corel) - OpenLife.cc". openlife.cc. Archived from the original on 2012-01-03. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ CrunchBang Linux website Archived 2012-11-26 at the Wayback Machine

^ "The end. / News & Announcements / CrunchBang Linux Forums". CrunchBang Linux Forums. Archived from the original on 2015-02-16. Retrieved 2015-04-23.

^ Stahie, Silviu (28 November 2014). "Fork Debian Project Announces the Systemd-less OS Devuan". Softpedia. Archived from the original on 30 November 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2014.

^ "Emdebian Grip packages: A smaller Debian-compatible distro". emdebian.org. Archived from the original on 2013-11-30. Retrieved 2014-01-20.

^ "Finnix". www.finnix.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "grml.org - Debian Live system / CD for sysadmins and texttool-users". grml.org. Archived from the original on 2012-12-06. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ Wiki Debian HandyLinux Debian Derivatives Census Archived 2016-01-03 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Our Most Advanced Penetration Testing Distribution, Ever". www.kali.org. Archived from the original on 2013-04-02. Retrieved 2013-03-28.

^ "BackTrack Linux - Penetration Testing Distribution". www.backtrack-linux.org. Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "Kali Linux Has Been Released!". 2013-03-12. Archived from the original on 2013-05-09. Retrieved 2013-03-18.

^ "kanotix.com :: GNU Linux Live system based on Debian, optimized for HD-install and high performance". www.kanotix.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-27. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "LEAF — Linux Embedded Appliance Firewall". leaf.sourceforge.net. Archived from the original on 2012-11-07. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "LiMux website". Archived from the original on 2014-07-02. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "Linux Mint Debian Edition". Archived from the original on 2010-09-10. Retrieved 2021-05-20.

^ "maemo.org - maemo.org: Home of the Maemo community". maemo.org. 1 December 2006. Archived from the original on 23 November 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2012.

^ "Home". Mint PPC. Archived from the original on 2010-10-13. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Musix GNU+Linux website Archived 2013-04-01 at the Wayback Machine

^ "MX Linux - MX Community". mxlinux.org. Archived from the original on 2016-11-13. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "nepalinux.org - Home". www.nepalinux.org. Archived from the original on 2011-03-12. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "Apache2 Debian Default Page: It works". www.openzaurus.org. Archived from the original on 2002-03-30. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "News – Parsix GNU/Linux - Desktop Linux Operating System". Archived from the original on 2017-09-03.

^ "Parsix website". Archived from the original on 2008-09-07. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "PelcianHPC". pelicanhpc.awict.net. Archived from the original on 2016-07-17. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "GNU.org". Archived from the original on 2014-12-16.

^ "FSF adds PureOS to list of endorsed GNU/Linux distributions — Free Software Foundation — working together for free software". www.fsf.org. Archived from the original on 2019-06-22. Retrieved 2019-07-19.

^ "DistroWatch.com: PureOS". distrowatch.com. Archived from the original on 2019-04-06. Retrieved 2019-07-19.

^ "PureOS: One Linux for both PCs and smartphones". ZDNet. Archived from the original on 2019-03-25. Retrieved 2019-07-19.

^ "Q4OS". Archived from the original on 2014-09-12. Retrieved 2021-10-30.

^ "SolydXK Community — English". solydxk.com. Archived from the original on 2019-01-22. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Sunwah Linux website Archived 2012-09-11 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Tails - Privacy for anyone anywhere". tails.boum.org. Archived from the original on 2012-11-05. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "TurnKey Linux: 100+ free ready-to-use system images for virtual machines, the cloud, and bare metal". www.turnkeylinux.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "UCS Univention Corporate Server: easy-to-use IT operations". Archived from the original on 2019-01-28. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "OPENSOURCE Web Kiosk software by Webconverger". webconverger.com. Archived from the original on 2019-01-22. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Vyatta website Archived 2012-04-24 at the Wayback Machine

^ "About Ubuntu Derivatives". Ubuntu. Archived from the original on August 14, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2012.

^ "Ubuntu flavours | Ubuntu". Archived from the original on 2022-07-04. Retrieved 2022-11-30.

^ "Edubuntu". www.edubuntu.org. Archived from the original on 2024-09-30. Retrieved 2005-10-15.

^ "Kubuntu - Friendly Computing". Archived from the original on 2024-10-08. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Smart, Chris (May 2009). "Another day, another Ubuntu derivative". Archived from the original on 2012-01-21. Retrieved 2009-05-21.

^ LXDE (February 2009). "Lubuntu? LXDE Meet up with Mark Shuttleworth in Berlin". Archived from the original on 2012-02-24. Retrieved 2009-05-21.

^ "lubuntu". lubuntu. Archived from the original on 2018-12-21. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Sneddon, Joey (2023-03-28). "Ubuntu Cinnamon Now Official Ubuntu Flavour". OMG! Ubuntu!. Retrieved 2023-04-04.

^ Sneddon, Joey (1 March 2015). "Ubuntu 15.04 Beta Available to Download, Ubuntu MATE Is Now An Official Flavor". OMG Ubuntu. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 1 March 2015.

^ "Ubuntu Server - for scale out workloads - Ubuntu". www.ubuntu.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-23. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Ubuntu Studio". Archived from the original on 2013-03-07. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ Evangelho, Jason (12 May 2020). "A Surprising New Remix Of Ubuntu 20.04 Brings Unity Back To Life". Forbes. Archived from the original on 20 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2020.

^ "Ubuntu Unity Becoming An Official Flavor With 22.10 Release". www.phoronix.com. Archived from the original on 2022-10-22. Retrieved 2022-10-22.

^ "Xubuntu". xubuntu.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-26. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Gobuntu - Ubuntu Wiki". wiki.ubuntu.com. Archived from the original on 2012-07-28. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "Mythbuntu". www.mythbuntu.org. Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ Tim (11 March 2013). "Ubuntu GNOME approved as official flavour - Ubuntu GNOME". Archived from the original on 2013-06-02. Retrieved 2013-06-27.

^ "Ubuntu GNOME - An official flavor of Ubuntu, featuring the GNOME desktop environment". Archived from the original on 2013-06-06. Retrieved 2013-06-27.

^ "JeOS - Community Help Wiki". help.ubuntu.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-23. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ "Ubuntu to announce its mobile Linux in June". Archived from the original on 2008-09-05. Retrieved 2009-03-23.

^ Ubuntu TV website Archived 2012-11-27 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Homepage". BackBox.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Welcome". 10 August 2014. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2018.

^ "Which Linux Chrome OS Clone is Right For You?". Linux.com - The source for Linux information. 17 July 2015. Archived from the original on 15 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018.

^ "Chromixium Adds Polish to Chrome - Reviews - LinuxInsider". www.linuxinsider.com. 29 May 2015. Archived from the original on 2018-07-15. Retrieved 2018-07-16.

^ "Cub Linux Is a Worthy Chromixium Offspring - Reviews - LinuxInsider". www.linuxinsider.com. 9 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2018-07-15. Retrieved 2018-07-16.

^ "dyne:bolic website". Archived from the original on 2009-07-10. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "EasyPeasy website". Archived from the original on 2012-11-26. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "Aurora website". Archived from the original on 2010-06-30. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ Element OS website Archived November 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine

^ Inc, elementary. "The fast, open, and privacy-respecting replacement for Windows and macOS ⋅ elementary OS". elementary.io. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23. {{cite web}}: |last= has generic name (help)

^ "Emmabuntus:Community portal/en - Emmabuntus". emmabuntus.sourceforge.io. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Lynch, Jim (2015-11-12). "GalliumOS Linux beta released for Chromebooks and Chromeboxes". InfoWorld. Archived from the original on 2019-03-23. Retrieved 2020-04-29.

^ Jolicloud. "Jolicloud". Jolicloud. Archived from the original on 2011-02-21. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Linux Schools - Linux Schools". www.linuxschools.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-08. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Lunduke, Bryan (10 February 2016). "KDE's new Linux distro KDE Neon: Terrible idea, or simply a mistake?". Archived from the original on 2024-04-26. Retrieved 2019-07-05.

^ "DistroWatch.com: Linux Caixa Mágica". distrowatch.com. Retrieved 2023-08-28.

^ "Linux Lite Easy to Use Free Linux Operating System". www.linuxliteos.com. Archived from the original on 2016-03-26. Retrieved 2016-03-26.

^ Drifter, Carlos Porto of Design. "Main Page - Linux Mint". linuxmint.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "Home: LinuxMCE home automation". www.linuxmce.com. Archived from the original on 2012-12-03. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ LinuxTLE website Archived 2005-09-13 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Mestre a casa - - LliureX - LliureX". mestreacasa.gva.es. Archived from the original on 2013-06-07. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ "LXLE website". Archived from the original on 2013-03-17. Retrieved 2021-10-30.

^ "MAX website". Archived from the original on 2010-05-27. Retrieved 2012-11-30.

^ Peri, Dinakar (2023-08-08). "India Defence Ministry to replace Microsoft OS with Maya". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 2024-04-30.

^ "Molinux website". Archived from the original on 2013-04-25. Retrieved 2013-04-27.

^ "Netrunner". Netrunner. Archived from the original on 2018-11-27. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "OpenGEU in Launchpad". launchpad.net. 19 September 2008. Archived from the original on 2013-05-22. Retrieved 2013-04-27.

^ "About Peppermint OS". Archived from the original on 2010-10-03. Retrieved 2010-09-05.

^ "Pinguy OS - Because using a computer is meant to be easy!". www.pinguyos.com. Archived from the original on 2011-12-16. Retrieved 2011-12-17.

^ "Sabily website". Archived from the original on 2018-07-29. Retrieved 2013-04-27.

^ "Trisquel GNU/Linux - Run free!". trisquel.info. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "UberStudent - Linux for Learners". www.uberstudent.org. Archived from the original on 2013-06-02. Retrieved 2013-04-27.

^ Saravia, Diego. "Ututo–Home". ututo.org. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2017.

^ "Vinux website". Archived from the original on 2013-07-20. Retrieved 2013-04-27.

^ Meet The Unique Linux OS That Looks Shockingly Similar To Windows 10, 2020-07-10, retrieved 2024-03-22

^ "Wubuntu Official Web-site". wubuntu.org. Retrieved 21 July 2024.

^ "Zorin OS - About". Zorin OS. Zorin Group. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 21 December 2018.

^ "Knoppix Documentation Wiki". knoppix.net. Archived from the original on 2012-12-07. Retrieved 2012-11-18.

^ "DSL information". www.damnsmalllinux.org. Archived from the original on 2018-09-30. Retrieved 2012-11-29.

^ Feather Linux website Archived 2005-07-03 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Garuda Linux Official website". Archived from the original on 2020-10-30. Retrieved 2021-11-27.

^ "Chakra project shutting down". DistroWatch. Archived from the original on 2020-11-11. Retrieved 2022-03-01.

^ "About Frugalware". Frugalware Stable Documentation. Frugalware Project. Archived from the original on 2011-09-27. Retrieved 2011-09-11.

^ "Intro". kaosx.us. Retrieved 2023-01-31.

^ "Current 12-18 Month Community Objectives :: Fedora Docs Site". docs.fedoraproject.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-16. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ a b "What is CentOS?". RedHat. RedHat. 2024-07-01. Retrieved 2025-03-10.

^ "DistroWatch.com: EnGarde Secure Linux". distrowatch.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ Singh, Karanbir (7 January 2014). "[CentOS-announce] CentOS Project joins forces with Red Hat". Archived from the original on 2014-01-07. Retrieved 2020-08-09.

^ "DistroWatch.com: Fermi Linux". distrowatch.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-24. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "The Elegant Mageia Linux Prepares a New Release | Linux.com". Archived from the original on 2014-10-17. Retrieved 2014-11-09.

^ "Mandriva SA official blog: Mandriva Linux will return to the community". Mandriva. 17 May 2012. Archived from the original on 23 May 2015. Retrieved 2015-12-13.

^ "About Gentoo – Gentoo Linux". www.gentoo.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-21. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Gentoo X86 Handbook - Gentoo Wiki". wiki.gentoo.org. Archived from the original on 2018-12-16. Retrieved 2018-12-23.

^ "Chromium OS Developer Guide". Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved January 29, 2015.

^ "DistroWatch.com: AUSTRUMI". distrowatch.com. Retrieved 2023-01-31.

^ Vaughan-Nichols, Steven J. "Debunking four myths about Android, Google, and open-source". ZDNet. Archived from the original on 2017-11-08. Retrieved 2017-11-24.

^ Heater, Brian (24 December 2016). "After having its infrastructure shuttered, CyanogenMod will live on as Lineage". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 6 December 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2020.

^ "A fork in the road". CyanogenMod. 24 December 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2016.

^ Smith, Chris (13 October 2013). "Meet OmniROM, a new custom ROM for Android". Android Authority. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 12 April 2024.

^ Bruce Byfield: Eight Completely Free Linux Distros (And One More) Archived 2012-01-18 at the Wayback Machine earthweb.com, 2011.

^ List of Free GNU/Linux Distributions - GNU Project, Free Software Foundation, archived from the original on 2014-12-14, retrieved 2014-12-15

^ "fli4l: News". www.fli4l.de. Archived from the original on 2012-11-12. Retrieved 2012-12-05.

^ Guix, GNU's advanced distro and transactional package manager, archived from the original on 2018-09-18, retrieved 2018-09-17

^ "Software Protection Initiative - Main". Spi.dod.mil. Archived from the original on 2012-08-29. Retrieved 2013-07-05.

^ "Lightweight Portable Security". Software Protection Initiative. DoD.mil. Archived from the original on 16 December 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2021.

^ "SliTaz LiveCD Flavors". Association SliTaz. Archived from the original on 8 March 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2015.


External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Using Ubuntu Linux/Ubuntu Variations

Linux free distros (Free Software Foundation)
Repository tracking
The LWN.net Linux Distribution List – Categorized list with information about each entry.
Distrowatch – Announcements, information, links and popularity ranking for many Linux distributions.
Linux Distros – Information and ISO files for many oldest Linux distributions.
vteLinux distributionsAndroidLineageOS
/e/
CalyxOS
CrDroid
iodéOS
Replicant

Android-x86
Celadon
ColorOS
EMUI
Fire OS
GrapheneOS
HiOS
One UI
Paranoid Android
Resurrection Remix OS
OmniROM
XOS
Xiaomi HyperOSArch
ArchBang
Artix
BlackArch
EndeavourOS
Frugalware
Garuda
Hyperbola GNU
LinHES
Manjaro
Parabola GNU
SteamOS (3.0 onwards)
SystemRescue
DebianUbuntu
Official: Edubuntu
Kubuntu
Lubuntu
Ubuntu Budgie
Ubuntu Cinnamon
Ubuntu Kylin
Ubuntu MATE
Ubuntu Studio
Ubuntu Unity
Xubuntu
Derivatives: BackBox
Bodhi Linux
elementary OS
Emmabuntüs
KDE neon
Freespire
Linux Lite
Linux Mint
LXLE Linux
Nova OS
Peppermint OS
Pop! OS
Trisquel
Ubuntu Touch
Uruk
Wubuntu
Zorin OS

antiX
Astra
Bharat Operating System Solutions
BlankOn Linux
Commodore OS
Damn Small Linux
deepin
Devuan
Elive
Endless OS
FreedomBox
Kaisen
Kali
Kanotix
Knoppix
MX Linux
Parrot OS
PureOS
Raspberry Pi OS
Q4OS
Slax
SparkyLinux
SolydXK
Tails
Tizen
TrueNAS
UOS
WhonixFedoraCentOSStream
AlmaLinux
EulerOS
Miracle Linux
Oracle Linux
Red Hat Enterprise Linux
Rocky Linux

Asahi Linux
Bazzite Linux
Network Security Toolkit
Nobara
Qubes OS
Red Star OS
Sailfish OSGentoo
Calculate Linux
ChromiumOS (ChromeOS)
Pentoo
Mandrake
ALT Linux
PCLinuxOS
Mandriva
Mageia
OpenMandriva Lx
ROSA Linux
Slackware
Austrumi Linux
Porteus
Salix OS
Slax
Zenwalk
SUSE
openSUSE
SUSE Linux Enterprise
Open Enterprise Server
GeckoLinux
Other
4MLinux
Alpine
CHAOS
Chimera Linux
Clear Linux OS
CRUX
Kwort
GoboLinux
Guix SD
KaiOS
KaOS
NixOS
Puppy
Source Mage
Solus
T2 SDE
Tiny Core Linux
Void
DiscontinuedAndroid
CyanogenMod
Cherry OS
DivestOS
MIUI
PixelExperience
Remix OS
Arch
ArchLabs
Antergos
Chakra
Debian
Ubuntu: Asturix
Black Lab Linux
Cub Linux
Gobuntu
gOS
Linux Caixa Mágica
LinuxTLE
Pinguy OS
Sabily
Ubuntu GNOME
Other derivatives: BackTrack
Corel Linux
CrunchBang Linux
DoudouLinux
Dreamlinux
Feather Linux
gNewSense
HandyLinux
Libranet
Musix GNU+Linux
Parsix
SteamOS (1.0–2.0)
Sunwah Linux
Gentoo
Container Linux
Sabayon Linux
xB Machine
Red Hat,Fedora
BLAG Linux and GNU
CentOS
ClearOS
Linpus Linux
Korora
Linux for PlayStation 2
Scientific Linux
Red Hat Linux
Rocks Cluster Distribution
Think Blue Linux
Turbolinux
Vine Linux
Yellow Dog Linux
Slackware
Absolute Linux
BioSLAX
Damn Vulnerable Linux
KateOS
Kongoni
NimbleX
Platypux
TopologiLinux
VectorLinux
SUSE
SUSE Studio Express

Caldera OpenLinux
DemoLinux
Familiar Linux
Firefox OS
B2G OS
Floppyfw
Foresight Linux
Immunix
Jurix
Linux Router Project
MCC Interim Linux
MeeGo
Mer
Mobilinux
Nitix
OpenELEC
Softlanding Linux System
Splashtop OS
Turkix
 List
 Comparison
 Linux portal
 Category

vteLinuxLinux kernel
History
Linus's law
Linux-libre
Booting process
Kernel oops
Tux
more…
Controversies
Criticism of Linux
Criticism of desktop Linux
GNU/Linux naming controversy
Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate
SCO and Linux
Distributions
General comparison
Distributions list
Netbook-specific comparison
Distributions that run from RAM
Lightweight
Security-focused operating system
Package manager
Package format
List of software package managers
Organizations
LinuxChix
Linux Counter
Linux Documentation Project
Linux Foundation
Linux Mark Institute
Linux User Group (LUG)
Adoption
Adopters
Desktop
Embedded
Gaming
Mobile
Range of use
Linux malware
Media
DistroWatch
Free Software Magazine
Full Circle
Hacker Public Radio
Linux.com
Linux Format
Linux Gazette
Linux Journal
Linux Magazine
LinuxUser
Ubuntu User
Linux Outlaws
Linux Voice
LugRadio
LWN.net
Phoronix
Revolution OS
The Code
Professional related certifications
CompTIA Linux+
Linux Foundation
Red Hat
Ubuntu

 Linux portal
 Free and open-source software portal
 Category

vteFree and open-source softwareGeneral
Alternative terms for free software
Comparison of open-source and closed-source software
Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities
Free software
Free software project directories
Gratis versus libre
Long-term support
Open-source software
Open-source software development
Outline
Timeline
Softwarepackages
Audio
Bioinformatics
Codecs
Configuration management
Drivers
Graphics
Wireless
Health
Mathematics
Office suites
Operating systems
Routing
Television
Video games
Web applications
E-commerce
Android apps
iOS apps
Commercial
Formerly proprietary
Formerly open-source
Community
Free software movement
History
Open-source-software movement
Events
Advocacy
Organisations
Free Software Movement of India
Free Software Foundation
Licenses
AFL
Apache
APSL
Artistic
Beerware
BSD
Creative Commons
CDDL
EPL
Free Software Foundation
GNU GPL
GNU AGPL
GNU LGPL
ISC
MIT
MPL
Python
Python Software Foundation License
Shared Source Initiative
Sleepycat
Unlicense
WTFPL
zlib
Types and standards
Comparison of licenses
Contributor License Agreement
Copyleft
Debian Free Software Guidelines
Definition of Free Cultural Works
Free license
The Free Software Definition
The Open Source Definition
Open-source license
Permissive software license
Public domain

Challenges
Digital rights management
License proliferation
Mozilla software rebranding
Proprietary device drivers
Proprietary firmware
Proprietary software
SCO/Linux controversies
Software patents
Software security
Tivoization
Trusted Computing
Related topics
Forking
GNU Manifesto
Microsoft Open Specification Promise
Open-core model
Open-source hardware
Shared Source Initiative
Source-available software
The Cathedral and the Bazaar
Revolution OS

 Portal
 Category

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Linux_distributions&oldid=1286983564"
Categories: Linux distributionsLists of operating systemsHidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1: unfit URLCS1 errors: generic nameArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataWikipedia pending changes protected pagesArticles lacking reliable references from February 2018All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles needing cleanup from February 2018All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2018Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2018Articles with multiple maintenance issues






 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 07:17 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







List of Linux distributions




























31 languages


Add topic
















