https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_frequency




Clock rate - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Determining factors




Toggle Determining factors subsection





1.1
Binning








1.2
Engineering










2
Historical milestones and current records








3
Research








4
Comparing








5
See also








6
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Clock rate



24 languages




العربيةCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어ItalianoമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålОлык марийਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSuomiУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Clock frequency)
Frequency at which a CPU chip or core is operating
"Clocking" redirects here. For the practice of tampering with odometers to read less mileage, see Odometer fraud.
Microprocessor clock speed measures the number of pulses per second generated by an oscillator that sets the tempo for the processor. It is measured in hertz (pulses per second).
Clock rate or clock speed in computing typically refers to the frequency at which the clock generator of a processor can generate pulses used to synchronize the operations of its components.[1] It is  used as an indicator of the processor's speed. Clock rate is measured in the SI unit of frequency hertz (Hz).
The clock rate of the first generation of computers was measured in hertz or kilohertz (kHz), the first personal computers from the 1970s through the 1980s had clock rates measured in megahertz (MHz). In the 21st century the speed of modern CPUs is commonly advertised in gigahertz (GHz). This metric is most useful when comparing processors within the same family, holding constant other features that may affect performance.


Determining factors[edit]
Binning[edit]
Representation of a clock signal and clock rate
Manufacturers of modern processors typically charge higher prices for processors that operate at higher clock rates, a practice called binning. For a given CPU, the clock rates are determined at the end of the manufacturing process through testing of each processor. Chip manufacturers publish a "maximum clock rate" specification, and they test chips before selling them to make sure they meet that specification, even when executing the most complicated instructions with the data patterns that take the longest to settle (testing at the temperature and voltage that gives the lowest performance). Processors successfully tested for compliance with a given set of standards may be labeled with a higher clock rate, e.g., 3.50 GHz, while those that fail the standards of the higher clock rate yet pass the standards of a lower clock rate may be labeled with the lower clock rate, e.g., 3.3 GHz, and sold at a lower price.[2][3]

Engineering[edit]
The clock rate of a CPU is normally determined by the frequency of an oscillator crystal. Typically a crystal oscillator produces a fixed sine wave—the frequency reference signal. Electronic circuitry translates that into a square wave at the same frequency for digital electronics applications (or, when using a CPU multiplier, some fixed multiple of the crystal reference frequency). The clock distribution network inside the CPU carries that clock signal to all the parts that need it. An A/D Converter has a "clock" pin driven by a similar system to set the sampling rate. With any particular CPU, replacing the crystal with another crystal that oscillates at half the frequency ("underclocking") will generally make the CPU run at half the performance and reduce waste heat produced by the CPU. Conversely, some people try to increase performance of a CPU by replacing the oscillator crystal with a higher frequency crystal ("overclocking").[4] However, the amount of overclocking is limited by the time for the CPU to settle after each pulse, and by the extra heat created.
After each clock pulse, the signal lines inside the CPU need time to settle to their new state. That is, every signal line must finish transitioning from 0 to 1, or from 1 to 0. If the next clock pulse comes before that, the results will be incorrect. In the process of transitioning, some energy is wasted as heat (mostly inside the driving transistors). When executing complicated instructions that cause many transitions, the higher the clock rate the more heat produced. Transistors may be damaged by excessive heat.
There is also a lower limit of the clock rate, unless a fully static core is used.

Historical milestones and current records[edit]
The first fully mechanical digital computer, the Z1, operated at 1 Hz (cycle per second) clock frequency and the first electromechanical general purpose computer, the Z3, operated at a frequency of about 5–10 Hz. The first electronic general purpose computer, the ENIAC, used a 100 kHz clock in its cycling unit. As each instruction took 20 cycles, it had an instruction rate of 5 kHz.
The first commercial PC, the Altair 8800 (by MITS), used an Intel 8080 CPU with a clock rate of 2 MHz (2 million cycles per second). The original IBM PC (c. 1981) had a clock rate of 4.77 MHz (4,772,727 cycles per second). In 1992, both Hewlett-Packard and Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) exceeded 100 MHz with RISC techniques in the PA-7100 and AXP 21064 DEC Alpha respectively. In 1995, Intel's P5 Pentium chip ran at 100 MHz (100 million cycles per second). On March 6, 2000, AMD demonstrated passing the 1 GHz milestone a few days ahead of Intel shipping 1 GHz in systems. In 2002, an Intel Pentium 4 model was introduced as the first CPU with a clock rate of 3 GHz (three billion cycles per second corresponding to ~ 0.33 nanoseconds per cycle). Since then, the clock rate of production processors has increased more slowly, with performance improvements coming from other design changes.
Set in 2011, the Guinness World Record for the highest CPU clock rate is 8.42938 GHz with an overclocked AMD FX-8150 Bulldozer-based chip in an LHe/LN2 cryobath, 5 GHz on air.[5][6] This is surpassed by the CPU-Z overclocking record for the highest CPU clock rate at 8.79433 GHz with an AMD FX-8350 Piledriver-based chip bathed in LN2, achieved in November 2012.[7][8] It is also surpassed by the slightly slower AMD FX-8370 overclocked to 8.72 GHz which tops off the HWBOT frequency rankings.[9][10] These records were broken in 2025 when an Intel Core i9-13900KF was overclocked to 9.12 GHz.[11]
The highest boost clock rate on a production processor is the i9-14900KS, clocked at 6.2 GHz, which was released in Q1 2024.[12]

Research[edit]
Engineers continue to find new ways to design CPUs that settle a little more quickly or use slightly less energy per transition, pushing back those limits, producing new CPUs that can run at slightly higher clock rates. The ultimate limits to energy per transition are explored in reversible computing.
The first fully reversible CPU, the Pendulum, was implemented using standard CMOS transistors in the late 1990s at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.[13][14][15][16]
Engineers also continue to find new ways to design CPUs so that they complete more instructions per clock cycle, thus achieving a lower CPI (cycles or clock cycles per instruction) count, although they may run at the same or a lower clock rate as older CPUs. This is achieved through architectural techniques such as instruction pipelining and out-of-order execution which attempts to exploit instruction level parallelism in the code.

Comparing[edit]
Main article: Megahertz myth
The clock rate of a CPU is most useful for providing comparisons between CPUs in the same family. The clock rate is only one of several factors that can influence performance when comparing processors in different families. For example, an IBM PC with an Intel 80486 CPU running at 50 MHz will be about twice as fast (internally only) as one with the same CPU and memory running at 25 MHz, while the same will not be true for MIPS R4000 running at the same clock rate as the two are different processors that implement different architectures and microarchitectures. Further, a "cumulative clock rate" measure is sometimes assumed by taking the total cores and multiplying by the total clock rate (e.g. a dual-core 2.8 GHz processor running at a cumulative 5.6 GHz). There are many other factors to consider when comparing the performance of CPUs, like the width of the CPU's data bus, the latency of the memory, and the cache architecture.
The clock rate alone is generally considered to be an inaccurate measure of performance when comparing different CPUs families. Software benchmarks are more useful. Clock rates can sometimes be misleading since the amount of work different CPUs can do in one cycle varies. For example, superscalar processors can execute more than one instruction per cycle (on average), yet it is not uncommon for them to do "less" in a clock cycle. In addition, subscalar CPUs or use of parallelism can also affect the performance of the computer regardless of clock rate.

See also[edit]

Crystal oscillator frequencies
Double data rate
Quad data rate
Pulse wave
Instructions per second
Moore's law

References[edit]


^  Clock at the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing 

^ US 6826738, "Optimization of die placement on wafers" .

^ US 6694492, "Method and apparatus for optimizing production yield and operational performance of integrated circuits" .

^ Soderstrom, Thomas (11 December 2006). "Overclocking Guide Part 1: Risks, Choices and Benefits : Who Overclocks?". "Overclocking" early processors was as simple –  and as limited –  as changing the discrete clock crystal ... The advent of adjustable clock generators has allowed "overclocking" to be done without changing parts such as the clock crystal.

^ "Highest clock frequency achieved by a silicon processor".

^ Chiappetta, Marco (23 September 2011). "AMD Breaks 8 GHz Overclock with Upcoming FX Processor, Sets World Record with AMD FX 8350". HotHardware. Archived from the original on 2015-03-10. Retrieved 2012-04-28.

^ "CPU-Z Validator – World Records".

^ "8.79GHz FX-8350 is the Fastest Ever CPU | ROG – Republic of Gamers Global".

^ James, Dave (16 December 2019). "AMD's Ryzen rules overclocking world records… but can't beat a 5 year-old chip". pcgamesn. Retrieved 23 November 2021. 

^ "CPU Frequency: Hall of Fame". hwbot.org. HWBOT. Retrieved 23 November 2021.

^ Nasir, Hassam (12 January 2025). "Intel i9-14900KF overclocker clinches CPU frequency world record at 9.12 GHz — Wytiwx joins Elmor as the only person to push a CPU past 9 GHz". Tom's Hardware.

^ "Products formerly Raptor Lake". www.intel.com. Retrieved 2024-07-05.

^ 
Frank, Michael. "The Reversible and Quantum Computing Group (Revcomp)". www.cise.ufl.edu. Retrieved 2024-03-17.

^ 
Swaine, Michael (2004). "Backward to the Future". Dr. Dobb's. Retrieved 2024-03-17.

^ 
Michael P. Frank. "Reversible Computing: A Requirement for Extreme Supercomputing".

^ 
Matthew Arthur Morrison. "Theory, Synthesis, and Application of Adiabatic and Reversible Logic Circuits For Security Applications". 2014.


vteProcessor technologiesModels
Abstract machine
Stored-program computer
Finite-state machine
with datapath
Hierarchical
Deterministic finite automaton
Queue automaton
Cellular automaton
Quantum cellular automaton
Turing machine
Alternating Turing machine
Universal
Post–Turing
Quantum
Nondeterministic Turing machine
Probabilistic Turing machine
Hypercomputation
Zeno machine
Belt machine
Stack machine
Register machines
Counter
Pointer
Random-access
Random-access stored program
Architecture
Microarchitecture
Von Neumann
Harvard
modified
Dataflow
Transport-triggered
Cellular
Endianness
Memory access
NUMA
HUMA
Load–store
Register/memory
Cache hierarchy
Memory hierarchy
Virtual memory
Secondary storage
Heterogeneous
Fabric
Multiprocessing
Cognitive
Neuromorphic
Instruction setarchitecturesTypes
Orthogonal instruction set
CISC
RISC
Application-specific
EDGE
TRIPS
VLIW
EPIC
MISC
OISC
NISC
ZISC
VISC architecture
Quantum computing
Comparison
Addressing modes
Instructionsets
Motorola 68000 series
VAX
PDP-11
x86
ARM
Stanford MIPS
MIPS
MIPS-X
Power
POWER
PowerPC
Power ISA
Clipper architecture
SPARC
SuperH
DEC Alpha
ETRAX CRIS
M32R
Unicore
Itanium
OpenRISC
RISC-V
MicroBlaze
LMC
System/3x0
S/360
S/370
S/390
z/Architecture
Tilera ISA
VISC architecture
Epiphany architecture
Others
ExecutionInstruction pipelining
Pipeline stall
Operand forwarding
Classic RISC pipeline
Hazards
Data dependency
Structural
Control
False sharing
Out-of-order
Scoreboarding
Tomasulo's algorithm
Reservation station
Re-order buffer
Register renaming
Wide-issue
Speculative
Branch prediction
Memory dependence prediction
ParallelismLevel
Bit
Bit-serial
Word
Instruction
Pipelining
Scalar
Superscalar
Task
Thread
Process
Data
Vector
Memory
Distributed
Multithreading
Temporal
Simultaneous
Hyperthreading
Simultaneous and heterogenous
Speculative
Preemptive
Cooperative
Flynn's taxonomy
SISD
SIMD
Array processing (SIMT)
Pipelined processing
Associative processing
SWAR
MISD
MIMD
SPMD
Processorperformance
Transistor count
Instructions per cycle (IPC)
Cycles per instruction (CPI)
Instructions per second (IPS)
Floating-point operations per second (FLOPS)
Transactions per second (TPS)
Synaptic updates per second (SUPS)
Performance per watt (PPW)
Cache performance metrics
Computer performance by orders of magnitude
Types
Central processing unit (CPU)
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
GPGPU
Vector
Barrel
Stream
Tile processor
Coprocessor
PAL
ASIC
FPGA
FPOA
CPLD
Multi-chip module (MCM)
System in a package (SiP)
Package on a package (PoP)
By application
Embedded system
Microprocessor
Microcontroller
Mobile
Ultra-low-voltage
ASIP
Soft microprocessor
Systemson chip
System on a chip (SoC)
Multiprocessor (MPSoC)
Cypress PSoC
Network on a chip (NoC)
Hardwareaccelerators
Coprocessor
AI accelerator
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
Image processor
Vision processing unit (VPU)
Physics processing unit (PPU)
Digital signal processor (DSP)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Secure cryptoprocessor
Network processor
Baseband processor

Word size
1-bit
4-bit
8-bit
12-bit
15-bit
16-bit
24-bit
32-bit
48-bit
64-bit
128-bit
256-bit
512-bit
bit slicing
others
variable
Core count
Single-core
Multi-core
Manycore
Heterogeneous architecture
Components
Core
Cache
CPU cache
Scratchpad memory
Data cache
Instruction cache
replacement policies
coherence
Bus
Clock rate
Clock signal
FIFO
Functionalunits
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
Address generation unit (AGU)
Floating-point unit (FPU)
Memory management unit (MMU)
Load–store unit
Translation lookaside buffer (TLB)
Branch predictor
Branch target predictor
Integrated memory controller (IMC)
Memory management unit
Instruction decoder
Logic
Combinational
Sequential
Glue
Logic gate
Quantum
Array
Registers
Processor register
Status register
Stack register
Register file
Memory buffer
Memory address register
Program counter
Control unit
Hardwired control unit
Instruction unit
Data buffer
Write buffer
Microcode ROM
Counter
Datapath
Multiplexer
Demultiplexer
Adder
Multiplier
CPU
Binary decoder
Address decoder
Sum-addressed decoder
Barrel shifter
Circuitry
Integrated circuit
3D
Mixed-signal
Power management
Boolean
Digital
Analog
Quantum
Switch

Powermanagement
PMU
APM
ACPI
Dynamic frequency scaling
Dynamic voltage scaling
Clock gating
Performance per watt (PPW)
Related
History of general-purpose CPUs
Microprocessor chronology
Processor design
Digital electronics
Hardware security module
Semiconductor device fabrication
Tick–tock model
Pin grid array
Chip carrier





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clock_rate&oldid=1282852745"
Categories: Clock signalTemporal ratesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 00:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Clock rate




























24 languages


Add topic
















