https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_manager




File manager - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Features




Toggle Features subsection





1.1
File transfer








1.2
User interface








1.3
Networking










2
Directory editors








3
File-list file manager








4
Orthodox file managers




Toggle Orthodox file managers subsection





4.1
Features






4.1.1
Tabbed panels








4.1.2
Portability








4.1.3
Dual-pane managers












5
Navigational file manager




Toggle Navigational file manager subsection





5.1
Concepts










6
Spatial file manager








7
3D file managers








8
Web-based file managers








9
File picker








10
See also








11
References








12
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







File manager



38 languages




العربيةবাংলাCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어HrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიKiswahiliLietuviųMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Computer program that provides a user interface to work with file systems
"File Manager" redirects here and is not to be confused with Windows File Manager.
"file browser" redirects here and is not to be confused with file viewer.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "File manager" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
A file manager or file browser is a computer program that provides a user interface to manage files and folders.[1]  The most common operations performed on files or groups of files include creating, opening (e.g. viewing, playing, editing or printing), renaming, copying, moving, deleting and searching for files, as well as modifying file attributes, properties and file permissions. Folders and files may be displayed in a hierarchical tree based on their directory structure.


Features[edit]
File transfer[edit]
Graphical file managers may support copying and moving of files through "copy and paste" and "cut and paste" respectively, as well as through drag and drop, and a separate menu for selecting the target path.[2]
While transferring files, a file manager may show the source and destination directories, transfer progress in percentage and/or size, progress bar, name of the file currently being transferred, remaining and/or total number of files, numerical transfer rate, and graphical transfer rate. The ability to pause the file transfer allows temporarily granting other software full sequential read access while allowing to resume later without having to restart the file transfer.[3]
Some file managers move multiple files by copying and deleting each selected file from the source individually, while others first copy all selected files, then delete them from the source afterwards, as described in computer file § Moving methods.
Conflicting file names in a target directory may be handled through renaming, overwriting, or skipping. Renaming is typically numerical. Overwriting may be conditional, such as when the source file is newer or differs in size.[4] Files could technically be compared with checksums, but that would require reading through the entire source and target files, which would slow down the process significantly on larger files.

User interface[edit]
Some file managers contain features analogous to web browsers, including forward and back navigational buttons, an address bar, tabs, and a bookmark side bar.

Networking[edit]
Some file managers provide network connectivity via protocols, such as FTP, HTTP, NFS, SMB or WebDAV. This is achieved by allowing the user to browse for a file server (connecting and accessing the server's file system like a local file system) or by providing its own full client implementations for file server protocols.

Directory editors[edit]
A term that predates[citation needed] the usage of file manager is directory editor.  An early directory editor, DIRED, was developed circa 1974 at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory by Stan Kugell.[5][6]
A directory editor was written for EXEC 8 at the University of Maryland, and was available to other users at that time. The term was used by other developers, including Jay Lepreau, who wrote the dired program in 1980,[7] which ran on BSD. This was in turn inspired by an older program with the same name running on TOPS-20. Dired inspired other programs, including dired, the editor script (for emacs and similar editors), and ded.
[8]

File-list file manager[edit]
The Alto Neptune file manager program
File-list file managers are lesser known and older than orthodox file managers.
One such file manager was neptune. It ran on the Xerox Alto in the 1973-1974 time frame.
It had some of the same features that would end up in orthodox file managers.
Another such file manager is flist, which was introduced sometime before 1980 on the Conversational Monitor System.[9][10][11]
This is a variant of FULIST, which originated before late 1978, according to comments by its author, Theo Alkema.[12]
The flist program provided a list of files in the user's minidisk,[13] and allowed sorting by any file attribute. The file attributes could be passed to scripts or function-key definitions, making it simple to use flist as part of CMS EXEC, EXEC 2 or XEDIT scripts.
This program ran only on IBM VM/SP CMS, but was the inspiration for other programs, including filelist[14][15][16] (a script run via the Xedit editor), and programs running on other operating systems, including a program also called flist, which ran on OpenVMS,[17] and FULIST (from the name of the corresponding internal IBM program),[18] which runs on Unix.[19]

Orthodox file managers[edit]
Midnight Commander, an orthodox file manager with a text-based user interface
Orthodox file managers (sometimes abbreviated to "OFM") or command-based file managers are text-menu based file managers that commonly have three windows (two panels and one command line window). Orthodox file managers are one of the longest running families of file managers, preceding graphical user interface-based types. Developers create applications that duplicate and extend the manager that was introduced by PathMinder and John Socha's Norton Commander for DOS.[citation needed] The concept dates to the mid-1980s—PathMinder was released in 1984, and Norton Commander version 1.0 was released in 1986. Despite the age of this concept, file managers based on Norton Commander are actively developed, and dozens of implementations exist for DOS, Unix, and Microsoft Windows. Nikolai Bezroukov publishes his own set of criteria for an OFM standard (version 1.2 dated June 1997).[20]

Features[edit]
An orthodox file manager typically has three windows. Two of the windows are called panels and are positioned symmetrically at the top of the screen. The third is the command line, which is essentially a minimized command (shell) window that can be expanded to full screen. Only one of the panels is active at a given time. The active panel contains the "file cursor". Panels are resizable and can be hidden. Files in the active panel serve as the source of file operations performed by the manager. For example, files can be copied or moved from the active panel to the location represented in the passive panel. This scheme is most effective for systems in which the keyboard is the primary or sole input device. The active panel shows information about the current working directory and the files that it contains. The passive (inactive) panel shows the content of the same or another directory (the default target for file operations). Users may customize the display of columns that show relevant file information. The active panel and passive panel can be switched (often by pressing the tab key).
The following features describe the class of orthodox file managers.

They present the user with a two-panel directory view with a command line below. Either panel may be selected to be active; the other becomes passive. The active panel becomes the working area for delete and rename operations, while the passive panel serves as a target for copy and move operations. Panels may be shrunk, exposing the terminal window hidden behind them. Normally, only the last line of the terminal window (the command line) is visible.
They provide close integration with an underlying OS shell via command line, using the associated terminal window that permits viewing the results of executing shell commands entered on the command line (e.g., via Ctrl-O shortcut in Norton Commander).
They provide the user with extensive keyboard shortcuts.
The file manager frees the user from having to use the mouse.
Users can create their own file associations and scripts that are invoked for certain file types and organize these scripts into a hierarchical tree (e.g., as a user script library or user menu).[citation needed]
Users can extend the functionality of the manager via a so-called User menu or Start menu and extensions menu.
Other common features include:

Information on the "active" and "passive" panels may be used for constructing commands on the command line.  Examples include current file, path to left panel, path to right panel, etc.
They provide a built-in viewer for (at least) the most basic file types.
They have a built-in editor.  In many cases, the editor can extract certain elements of the panels into the text being edited.
Many support virtual file systems (VFS) such as viewing compressed archives, or working with files via an FTP connection.
They often have the word commander in the name, after Norton Commander.
Path: shows the source/destination location of the directory in use
Information about directory size, disk usage and disk name (usually at the bottom of the panels)
Panel with information about file name, extension, date and time of creation, last modification, and permissions (attributes).
Info panel with the number of files in directory, and the sum of the sizes of selected files.
Tabbed interface (usually in GUI file managers)
Function keys: F1–F10 have all the same functions under all orthodox file managers. Examples: F5 always copies file(s) from the active to the inactive panel, while F6 moves the file.
Tabbed panels[edit]
The introduction of tabbed panels in some file managers (for example Total Commander) made it possible to manipulate more than one active and passive directory at a time.

Portability[edit]
Orthodox file managers[21] are among the most portable file managers.  Examples are available on almost any platform, with both command-line and graphical interfaces. This is unusual among command line managers in that something purporting to be a standard for the interface is published. They are also actively supported by developers. This makes it possible to do the same work on different platforms without much relearning of the interface.

Dual-pane managers[edit]
Sometimes they are called dual-pane managers, a term that is typically used for programs such as the Windows File Explorer (see below). But they have three panes including a command line pane below (or hidden behind) two symmetric panes. Furthermore, most of these programs allow using just one of the two larger panes with the second hidden. Some also add an item to the Context Menu in Windows to "Open two Explorers, side by side".
Notable ones include:


Altap Salamander
Commander One
Demos Commander
Directory Opus
DOS Navigator (DN) and derivatives
Double Commander
emelFM2
Far Manager
ForkLift
GNOME Commander
Krusader
Midnight Commander (MC)
muCommander
Norton Commander (NC)
PathMinder
Ranger
Total Commander
Volkov Commander (VC)
WinSCP
XTree
ZTreeWin

Navigational file manager[edit]
File Manager in Windows 10, displaying the contents of partition X:
Nemo
A navigational file manager is a newer type of file manager. Since the advent of GUIs, it has become the dominant type of file manager for desktop computers.[22][better source needed]
Typically, it has two panes, with the filesystem tree in the left pane and the contents of the current directory in the right pane. For macOS, the Miller columns view in Finder (originating in NeXTStep) is a variation on the navigational file manager theme.[dubious – discuss]

The Miller Column browser from GNUstep is a type of Navigational file manager.
Concepts[edit]
The window displays the location currently being viewed.
The location being viewed (the current directory) can be changed by the user by opening directories, pressing a back button, typing a location, or using the additional pane with the navigation tree representing all or part of the filesystem.
Icons represent files, programs, and directories.
The interface in a navigational file manager often resembles a web browser, complete with back and forward buttons, and often reload buttons. Most also contain an address bar into which the file or directory path (or URI) can be typed.
Most navigational file managers have two panes, the left pane being a tree view of the filesystem. This means that unlike orthodox file managers, the two panes are asymmetrical in their content and use.
Selecting a directory in the Navigation pane on the left designates it as the current directory, displaying its contents in the Contents pane on the right. However, expanding (+) or collapsing (-) a portion of the tree without selecting a directory will not alter the contents of the right pane. The exception to this behavior applies when collapsing a parent of the current directory, in which case the selection is refocused on the collapsed parent directory, thus altering the list in the Contents pane.
The process of moving from one location to another need not open a new window. Several instances of the file manager can be opened simultaneously and communicate with each other via drag-and-drop and clipboard operations, so it is possible to view several directories simultaneously and perform cut-and paste operations between instances.
File operations are based on drag-and-drop and editor metaphors: users can select and copy files or directories onto the clipboard and then paste them in a different place in the filesystem or even in a different instance of the file manager.
Notable examples of navigational file managers include:

Directory Opus
Dolphin in KDE
DOS Shell in MS-DOS/PC DOS
File Manager in Windows
macOS Finder
Nautilus in GNOME (default since v2.30)
File Explorer (Windows Explorer)
PC Shell in PC Tools
ViewMAX in DR DOS
XTree / ZTreeWin
Spatial file manager[edit]
The Nautilus file manager had a spatial mode, which was removed with the arrival of GNOME (and with it Nautilus) version 3.x.  Each of these windows displays an open directory.
Spatial file managers use a spatial metaphor to represent files and directories as if they were actual physical objects. A spatial file manager imitates the way people interact with physical objects.
Some ideas behind the concept of a spatial file manager are:

A single window represents each opened directory
Each window is unambiguously and irrevocably tied to a particular directory.
Stability: files, directories, and windows go where the user moves them, stay where the user puts them ("preserve their spatial state"), and retain all their other "physical" characteristics (such as size, shape, color and location).
The same item can only be viewed in one window at a time.
As in navigational file managers, when a directory is opened, the icon representing the directory changes—perhaps from an image showing a closed drawer to an opened one, perhaps the directory's icon turns into a silhouette filled with a pattern—and a new window is opened to represent that directory.
Examples of file managers that use a spatial metaphor to some extent include:

Amiga's Workbench
Apple's Finder 5 to 9
BeOS's Tracker
Digital Research's Desktop (implemented in Atari TOS and as a somewhat reduced version for PCs)
E17 file manager
GNOME's Nautilus from version 2.6 (default until 2.29, completely removed in 3.0)
Haiku's Tracker
Konqueror has the option to turn into spatial mode
MATE's Caja (though the default mode is navigational)
OS/2's Workplace Shell
RISC OS Filer
ROX-Filer file manager (ROX Desktop)
Dysfunctional spatial file managers:

Windows Explorer in Windows 95 was set as a spatial file manager model by default; because it also worked as a navigational file manager, directories could be opened in multiple windows, which made it fail all the above criteria. Later versions gradually abandoned the spatial model.
Apple's Finder in macOS was designed with a similar integration of spatial and navigational modes, meaning that the spatial mode did not actually work.[23]
3D file managers[edit]
This section may contain excessive or irrelevant examples. Please help improve the article by adding descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. (September 2013)
File System Visualizer, one example of a 3D file manager
In Cubix, files sharing the same attributes are represented by cubes in a 3D environment.
Some projects have attempted to implement a three-dimensional method of displaying files and directory structures. Three-dimensional file browsing has not become popular; the exact implementation tends to differ between projects, and there are no common standards to follow.
Examples of three-dimensional file managers include:

File System Visualizer, or fsv, an open-source clone of fsn for modern Unix-like systems.
tdfsb,[24] an open-source 3D file browser, where one enters directories by flying into them (using WASD). Runs on Linux, FreeBSD and BeOS.
BumpTop, a file manager using a three-dimensional representation of a desktop with realistic physics, intended for use with a stylus and touchscreen.
Real Desktop,[25] a desktop replacement with similarities to BumpTop.
Cubix 3D Filer [26] is a Windows file manager which organizes files according to different attributes.
GopherVR, a 3D visualisation of networked Gopher resources.
Web-based file managers[edit]
Web-based file managers are typically scripts written in either PHP, Ajax, Perl, ASP or another server-side language. When installed on a local server or on a remote server, they allow files and directories located there to be managed and edited, using a web browser, without the need for FTP Access.
More advanced, and usually commercially distributed, web-based file management scripts allow the administrator of the file manager to configure secure, individual user accounts, each with individual account permissions. Authorized users have access to documents stored on the server or in their individual user directories anytime, from anywhere, via a web browser.
A web-based file manager can serve as an organization's digital repository. For example, documents, digital media, publishing layouts, and presentations can be stored, managed, and shared between customers, suppliers, and remote workers, or just internally.
Web-based file managers are becoming increasingly popular due to the rise in popularity of dynamic web content management systems (CMS) and the need for non-technical website moderators to manage media on their websites powered by these platforms.
An example is net2ftp, a PHP- and JavaScript-based FTP client.

File picker[edit]
Main article: File dialog
Operating systems typically ship a file picker, which allows specifying in which location to save a file (usually accessed through the "Save as" option in software), and where to open a file from. Sometimes, a folder is selected instead of a file or destination path.
Some file pickers also allow file management to some degree, such as searching, moving, copying, renaming, and copying the path to clipboard.
Some software might have a customized file picker.

See also[edit]
Batch renaming
Comparison of file managers
Disk space analyzer
Desktop metaphor
Spatial navigation
References[edit]


^ "Definition: File manager". Computer Language Encyclopedia. Retrieved June 9, 2023.

^ "6 Ways to Copy Files Faster in Windows 10". MakeUseOf. 15 December 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2022.

^ "All About Windows 8 FileName Collisions And Copy/Move Dialog Box". 2012-03-06. Archived from the original on 5 January 2014. Retrieved 2022-03-13.

^ The FTP file manager "FileZilla" includes the options "Overwrite if the source is newer", "Overwrite if different size", and "Overwrite if differenz size or source newer".

^ Kugell, Stanley G. (1974). "SAILDART/1974-08". Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab DART (Dump and Restore Technique) Archive. Archived from the original on 2015-09-03. Retrieved 2014-02-19.

^ SAILDART Username key for above Archived 2015-09-03 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Abstract for dired 3.05".

^ "DED - Directory Editor".

^ Daney, Charles (1983), "CMS Architecture and Interactive Computing" (PDF), Proceedings of SHARE 61, vol. 1, SHARE Inc., archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-04-22

^ "Discussion of VM/CMS FLIST showing screenshot". Archived from the original on 2007-08-31. Retrieved 2007-08-20.

^ "Textual description of VM/CMS FLIST". Archived from the original on 2008-01-30. Retrieved 2007-08-20.

^ "email by Theo Alkema to Lynn Wheeler". 1978-10-10. Retrieved 2008-01-31.

^ "FLIST - IBM".

^ "Comment on original author of FULIST". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27.

^ "Description of FILELIST". 8 February 1999.

^ "User comparing FLIST to FILELIST".

^ "FLIST - file manager for VAX/VMS".

^ "User comparing FULIST and FLIST".

^ "FULIST for Unix". Archived from the original on 2001-04-29.

^ "OFM standards".

^ "Home of the OFM standard".

^ "File Managers to Fit Your Every Need". Techopedia.com. 17 June 2015. Retrieved 2020-05-23.

^ Siracusa, John (2007-10-28). "Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard: the Ars Technica review: The Finder: An application divided against itself". Retrieved 2008-04-20.

^ tdfsb

^ "Real Desktop". Retrieved August 25, 2010. product homepage

^ "Cubix 3D Filer". Retrieved May 28, 2013. The Cubix Project Homepage


External links[edit]
About the Finder, by John Siracusa, Ars Technica, 2003. Retrieved 2010-12-26.
The Spatial Way, by Colin Charles, 2004. Retrieved 2010-12-26.
dired - directory editor. Archived from the original on 2008-04-03. Retrieved 2010-12-26.
4.3.2.2.3. FLIST at the Wayback Machine (archived February 15, 2003) in Introduction to IBM/CMS, Users' Manual, Department of Computer Science, University of Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada.
vteFile managers (comparison)Cross-platform
Dired
Dolphin
Double Commander
Graphics Environment Manager
Midnight Commander
MuCommander
Unix-like
emelFM2
gentoo
GNOME Commander
GNOME Files
Konqueror
Krusader
Nemo
nnn
PCManFM
ranger
SpaceFM
Thunar
Xfe
DOS
DOS Navigator
DOS Shell
Norton Commander
PathMinder
PC Shell
ViewMAX
Volkov Commander
XTree
OS/2 etc.
DOS Navigator
Norton Commander
WindowsOfficial
File Manager
File Explorer / Windows Explorer
Unofficial
Altap Salamander
Directory Opus
DOS Navigator
Explorer++
Far Manager
Norton Commander
STDU Explorer
Total Commander
WinSCP
xplorer²
XTree
XYplorer
ZTreeWin
Macintosh OSsClassic Mac OS
Finder
macOS
Commander One
Finder
ForkLift
Path Finder
Xfile
BeOS etc.
OpenTracker
Tracker

vteComputer filesTypes
Binary file / text file
Data file
File format
List of file formats
File signatures
Magic number
Open file formats
Proprietary file formats
Metafile
Sidecar file
Sparse file
Swap file
System file
Temporary file
Zero-byte file
Properties
Filename
8.3 filename
Long filename
Filename mangling
Filename extension
List of filename extensions
File attribute
Extended file attributes
File size
Hidden file / Hidden directory
Organisation
Directory/folder
NTFS links
Temporary folder
Directory structure
File system
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
Grid file system
Semantic file system
Path
Operations
Open
Close
Read
Write
Linking
File descriptor
Hard link
Shortcut
Alias
Shadow
Symbolic link
Management
Backup
File comparison
File copying
Data compression
File manager
Comparison of file managers
File system fragmentation
File-system permissions
File transfer
File sharing
File synchronization
File verification

vteFile systems
Comparison of file systems
distributed
Unix filesystem
Disk andnon-rotating
ADFS
AdvFS
Amiga FFS
Amiga OFS
APFS
AthFS
bcachefs
BFS
Be File System
Boot File System
Byte File System (z/VM)
Btrfs
CVFS
CXFS
DFS
EFS
Encrypting File System
Extent File System
Episode
ext
ext2
ext3
ext3cow
ext4
FAT
exFAT
Files-11
Fossil
GPFS
HAMMER
HAMMER2
HFS (Classic Mac OS)
HFS (MVS)
HFS+
HPFS
HTFS
JFS
LFS
MFS
Macintosh File System
TiVo Media File System
MINIX
NetWare File System
Next3
NILFS
NILFS2
NSS
NTFS
OneFS
OpenZFS
PFS
QFS
QNX4FS
ReFS
ReiserFS
Reiser4
Reliance
Reliance Nitro
RFS
SFS
Shared File System (VM)
Smart File System
SNFS
Soup (Apple)
Tux3
UBIFS
UFS/UFS2
soft updates
WAPBL
VxFS
WAFL
Xiafs
XFS
Xsan
zFS (z/OS)
ZFS (Sun)
Optical disc
HSF
ISO 9660
ISO 13490
UDF
Flash memory and SSD
APFS
FAT
exFAT
TFAT
EROFS
F2FS
JFS
NVFS
host-side wear leveling
CHFS
JFFS
JFFS2
LogFS
NILFS
NILFS2
YAFFS
UBIFS

Distributed parallel
BeeGFS
Ceph
CXFS
GFS2
Google File System
OCFS2
OrangeFS
PVFS
QFS
Xsan
more...
NAS
9P
AFS (OpenAFS)
AFP
Coda
DFS
Google File System
GPFS
Lustre
NCP
NFS
POHMELFS
Hadoop
SMB (CIFS)
SSHFS
more...
Specialized
Aufs
AXFS
Boot File System
Compact Disc File System
cramfs
Davfs2
EROFS
FTPFS
FUSE
Lnfs
LTFS
NOVA
MVFS
SquashFS
UMSDOS
OverlayFS
UnionFS
Pseudo
configfs
devfs
debugfs
kernfs
procfs
specfs
sysfs
tmpfs
WinFS
Encrypted
eCryptfs
EncFS
EFS
Rubberhose
SSHFS
ZFS
Types
Clustered
Global
Grid
Self-certifying
Flash
Journaling
Log-structured
Object
Record-oriented
Semantic
Steganographic
Synthetic
Versioning
Features
Case preservation
Copy-on-write
Data deduplication
Data scrubbing
Execute in place
Extent
File attribute
Extended file attributes
File change log
Fork
Inode
Links
Hard
Symbolic
Access control
Access-control list
Filesystem-level encryption
Permissions
Modes
Sticky bit
Interfaces
File manager
File system API
Installable File System
Virtual file system
Lists
Cryptographic
Default
Log-structured
Layouts
Master Boot Record
GUID Partition Table
Apple Partition Map





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File_manager&oldid=1279468974"
Categories: File managersUtility software typesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from September 2021All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2021Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from May 2020All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from August 2015Articles with too many examples from September 2013All articles with too many examplesWikipedia articles with style issues from September 2013






 This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 19:22 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







File manager




























38 languages


Add topic
















