https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategy_game




Strategy game - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Types




Toggle Types subsection





2.1
Abstract strategy








2.2
Team strategy








2.3
Eurogames








2.4
Simulation








2.5
Wargame








2.6
Strategy video games










3
See also








4
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Strategy game



26 languages




AzərbaycancaCatalàDanskDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어ItalianoעבריתLietuviųNederlandsNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPolskiPortuguêsRomânăSlovenčinaСрпски / srpskiSvenskaไทยTürkçeTürkmençeTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Type of game
For the video game genre, see Strategy video game.
Chess is one of the most well-known and frequently played strategy games.
The 1979 strategy wargame Divine Right
A strategy game or strategic game is a game in which the players' uncoerced, and often autonomous, decision-making skills have a high significance in determining the outcome. Almost all strategy games require internal decision tree-style thinking, and typically very high situational awareness.
Strategy games are also seen as a descendant of war games, and define strategy in terms of the context of war, but this is more partial. A strategy game is a game that relies primarily on strategy, and when it comes to defining what strategy is, two factors need to be taken into account: its complexity and game-scale actions, such as each placement in the Total War video game series. The definition of a strategy game in its cultural context should be any game that belongs to a tradition that goes back to war games, contains more strategy than the average video game, contains certain gameplay conventions, and is represented by a particular community. Although war is dominant in strategy games, it is not the whole story.[1]


History[edit]
The history of turn-based strategy games goes back to the times of ancient civilizations found in places such as Rome, Greece, Egypt, the Levant, and India. Many were played widely through their regions of origin, but only some are still played today.[2]
According to Thierry Depaulis, oldest strategy games would be the "Greek game of polis (πόλις), which appears in the literature around 450 BCE, and the more or less contemporary Chinese game of weiqi (‘go’), which, under the name of yi (弈), is mentioned in Confucius’s Analects (Lunyu) compiled between ca 470/50 and 280 BCE."[2]
The Royal Game of Ur from c. 2500 BCE which often been called one of the oldest board games, likely had some strategy elements as well, although it is generally seen as a luck-based race game.[3][4]
One of the earliest strategy games still played is mancala.[5] Due to claims that some artifacts from c. 5000 BCE might be old mancala boards, it has been suggested that mancala may be the oldest known strategy game, but this claim has been disputed.[3]
Another game that has stood the test of time is chess, believed to have originated in India around the sixth century CE.[6] The game spread to the west by trade, but chess gained social status and permanence more strongly than many other games. Chess became a game of skill and tactics often forcing the players to think two or three moves ahead of their opponent just to keep up.[7]

Types[edit]
Abstract strategy[edit]
Main article: Abstract strategy game
In abstract strategy games, the game is only loosely tied to a thematic concept, if at all. The rules do not attempt to simulate reality, but rather serve the internal logic of the game.
A purist's definition of an abstract strategy game requires that it cannot have random elements or hidden information. This definition includes such games as chess and Go. However, many games are commonly classed as abstract strategy games which do not meet these criteria: games such as backgammon, Octiles, Can't Stop, Sequence and Mentalis have all been described as "abstract strategy" games despite having a chance element.[citation needed] A smaller category of non-perfect abstract strategy games incorporate hidden information without using any random elements; for example, Stratego.

Team strategy[edit]
One of the most focused team strategy games is contract bridge. This card game consists of two teams of two players, whose offensive and defensive skills are continually in flux as the game's dynamic progresses. Some argue that the benefits of playing this team strategy card game extend to those skills and strategies used in business[8] and that the playing of these games helps to automate strategic awareness.

Eurogames[edit]
Main article: Eurogame
Eurogames, or German-style boardgames, are a relatively new genre that sit between abstract strategy games and simulation games. They generally have simple rules, short to medium playing times, indirect player interaction and abstract physical components. The games emphasize strategy, play down chance and conflict, lean towards economic rather than military themes, and usually keep all the players in the game until it ends.

Simulation[edit]
This type of game is an attempt to simulate the decisions and processes inherent to some real-world situation. Most of the rules are chosen to reflect what the real-world consequences would be of each player's actions and decisions. 
Abstract games cannot be completely divided from simulations and so games can be thought of as existing on a continuum of almost pure abstraction (like Abalone) to almost pure simulation (like Diceball! or Strat-o-Matic Baseball).

Wargame[edit]
Main article: Wargaming
A German military wargame from 1824
Wargames are simulations of military battles, campaigns, or entire wars. Players will have to consider situations that are analogous to the situations faced by leaders of historical battles. As such, wargames are usually heavy on simulation elements, and while they are all "strategy games", they can also be "strategic" or "tactical" in the military jargon sense. Its creator, H. G. Wells, stated how "much better is this amiable miniature [war] than the real thing".[9]
Traditionally, wargames have been played either with miniatures, using physical models of detailed terrain and miniature representations of people and equipment to depict the game state; or on a board, which commonly uses cardboard counters on a hex map.
Popular miniature wargames include Warhammer 40,000 or its fantasy counterpart Warhammer Fantasy. Popular strategic board wargames include Risk, Axis and Allies, Diplomacy, and Paths of Glory. Advanced Squad Leader is a successful tactical scale wargame.
It is instructive to compare the Total War series to the Civilization series, where moving troops to a specific tile is a tactic because there are no short-range decisions. But in Empire: Total War (2009), every encounter between two armies activates a real-time mode in which they must fight and the same movement of troops is treated as a strategy. Throughout the game, the movement of each army is at a macro scale, because the player can control each battle at a micro scale. However, as an experience, the two types of military operations are quite similar and involve similar skills and thought processes. The concept of micro scale and macro scale can well describe the gameplay of a game; however, even very similar games can be difficult to integrate into a common vocabulary. In this definition, strategy does not explicitly describe the player's experience; it is more appropriate to describe different formal game components. The similarity of the actions taken in two different games does not affect our definition of them as strategy or tactics: we will only rely on their scale in their respective games.[1]

Strategy video games[edit]
Main article: Strategy video game
Strategy video games are categorized based on whether they offer the continuous gameplay of real-time strategy (RTS), or the discrete phases of turn-based strategy (TBS).[10] Often the computer is expected to emulate a strategically thinking "side" similar to that of a human player (such as directing armies and constructing buildings), or emulate the "instinctive" actions of individual units that would be too tedious for a player to administer (such as for a peasant to run away when attacked, as opposed to standing still until otherwise ordered by the player); hence there is an emphasis on artificial intelligence.

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Strategy games.


Games portal
Game of chance
Game of skill
Mind sport
References[edit]


^ a b Dor, Simon (April 2018). "Strategy in Games or Strategy Games: Dictionary and Encyclopaedic Definitions for Game Studies". Game Studies. 18 (1). ISSN 1604-7982.

^ a b Depaulis, Thierry (2021-04-13). "A Timeline of Mind Games, with Some Correlations". BOARD GAME STUDIES COLLOQUIUM- The Evolutions of Board Games, Apr 2021, Paris, France.

^ a b Depaulis, Thierry (2020-10-01). "Board Games Before Ur?". Board Game Studies Journal. 14 (1): 127–144. doi:10.2478/bgs-2020-0007. ISSN 2183-3311.

^ Botermans, Jack (2008). The book of games : strategy, tactics & history. Fankbonner, Edgar Loy. New York: Sterling. pp. [1]. ISBN 9781402742217. OCLC 86069181.

^ "11 Ancient Board Games". 2016-03-01. Retrieved 2017-04-10.

^ (MisterCutie), Matthew. "The History of Chess: The Basics". Chess.com. Retrieved 2017-04-10.

^ Adams, Jenny (2011). Power Play: The Literature and Politics of Chess in the Late Middle Ages. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 9780812201048.

^ "How to automate strategic & tactical thinking Archived 2015-02-23 at the Wayback Machine

^ Rundle, Michael (2013-04-09). "How H. G. Wells Invented Modern War Games 100 Years Ago". The Huffington Post.

^ "Strategy Games". Apple. Retrieved 2008-12-28.


vteGame genres
Children
Chance
Gambling
Guessing
Party
Redemption
Role-playing
Skill
Sport
Strategy
Street
Tabletop
Traditional
Video
 List of game genres
vteTabletop games by typeBoard game
Abstract strategy game
Connection game
Tafl games
Adventure board game
Amerigame
Constructible strategy game
Cooperative board game
Deduction board game
Eurogame
Race game
Cross and circle game
Legacy game
Miniatures game
Collectible miniatures game
Running-fight game
Tables game
Train game
18XX
Wargame
Card game
Collectible card game
Deck-building game
Dedicated deck card game
Shedding-type games
Patience
Tarot card games
Trick-taking game
Other
Dice game
Matching game
Megagame
Icehouse pieces
Piecepack
Paper-and-pencil game
Social deduction game
Tabletop role-playing game
Tile-based game
Dominoes
Games
Chinese dominoes

Authority control databases: National Germany




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strategy_game&oldid=1274664373"
Category: Strategy gamesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2008Commons category link from Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 8 February 2025, at 16:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Strategy game




























26 languages


Add topic
















