https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Place_and_route




Place and route - Wikipedia


























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Printed circuit board








2
Field-programmable gate array








3
Integrated circuits








4
History








5
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Place and route



3 languages




Français한국어Українська

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Stage of electronic circuit design

Place and route (also called PnR or P&R) is a stage in the design of printed circuit boards, integrated circuits, and field-programmable gate arrays. As implied by the name, it is composed of two steps, placement and routing. The first step, placement, involves deciding where to place all electronic components, circuitry, and logic elements in a generally limited amount of space. This is followed by routing, which decides the exact design of all the wires needed to connect the placed components. This step must implement all the desired connections while following the rules and limitations of the manufacturing process.
Place and route is used in several contexts:

Printed circuit boards, during which components are graphically placed on the board and the wires drawn between them
Integrated circuits, during which a layout of a larger block of the circuit or the whole circuit is created from layouts of smaller sub-blocks
FPGAs, during which logic elements are placed and interconnected on the grid of the FPGA
These processes are similar at a high level, but the actual details are very different. With the large sizes of modern designs, this operation is usually performed by electronic design automation (EDA) tools.
In all these contexts, the final result when placing and routing is finished is the "layout", a geometric description of the location and rotation of each part, and the exact path of each wire connecting them.
Occasionally some people call the entire place-and-route process "layout".


Printed circuit board[edit]
The design of a printed circuit board comes after the creation of a schematic and generation of a netlist. The generated netlist is then read into a layout tool and associated with the footprints of the devices from a library. Placing and routing the devices can now start.[1]
Placing and routing is generally done in two steps.  Placing the components comes first, then routing the connections between the components.  The placement of components is not absolute during the routing phase, as it may still be changed by moving and rotating, especially with designs using more complex components such as FPGAs or microprocessors.  Their large number of signals, and their signal integrity needs may require optimization of the placement.[2]
The resulting design is then output in RS-274X Gerber format to load in the computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) system of the manufacturer. In contrast to an IC layout, where the entire finished layout is stored in one graphics file, different files and formats are needed for PCB manufacture. The fabrication data consists of a set of Gerber files, a drill file, and a pick-and-place file containing the location and alignment of the devices generated for automated placement of the devices in the assembly process.[1]

Field-programmable gate array[edit]
The process of placing and routing for an FPGA is generally not performed by a person, but uses a tool provided by the FPGA Vendor or  another software manufacturer.  The need for software tools is because of the complexity of the circuitry within the FPGA and the function the designer wishes to perform.  FPGA designs are described using logic diagrams containing digital logic and hardware description languages such as VHDL and Verilog.  These will then be put through an automated place-and-route procedure to generate a pinout, which will be used to interface with the parts outside of the FPGA.[2]

Integrated circuits[edit]
The IC place-and-route stage typically starts with one or more schematics, HDL files, or pre-routed IP cores, or some combination of all three. It produces an IC layout that is automatically converted to a mask work in the standard GDS II or the OASIS format.[3]

History[edit]
The final layout of early ICs and PCBs was stored as a tape-out of Rubylith on  transparent film.
Gradually, electronic design automation automated more and more of the place-and-route work. At first, it merely sped up the process of making many small edits without spending a lot of time peeling up and sticking down the tape. Later design rule checking sped up the process of checking for the most common sorts of errors. Later auto routers speed up the process of routing.
Some people hope that further improvements in autoplacers and autorouters will eventually produce good layouts without any human manual intervention. Further automation leads to the idea of a silicon compiler.

References[edit]


^ a b J. Lienig, J. Scheible (2020). "Chap. 1.3.3: Physical Design of Printed Circuit Boards". Fundamentals of Layout Design for Electronic Circuits. Springer. p. 26-27. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39284-0. ISBN 978-3-030-39284-0. S2CID 215840278.

^ a b "FPGA/PCB Co-Design Increases Fabrication Yields". Printed Circuit Design and Fabrication. Retrieved 2008-07-24.

^ A. Kahng, J. Lienig, I. Markov, J. Hu: "VLSI Physical Design: From Graph Partitioning to Timing Closure", Springer (2022), doi:10.1007/978-3-030-96415-3, ISBN 978-3-030-96414-6, pp. 5-10.


vteDigital electronicsComponents
Transistor
Resistor
Inductor
Capacitor
Printed electronics
Printed circuit board
Electronic circuit
Flip-flop
Memory cell
Combinational logic
Sequential logic
Logic gate
Boolean circuit
Integrated circuit (IC)
Hybrid integrated circuit (HIC)
Mixed-signal integrated circuit
Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC)
Emitter-coupled logic (ECL)
Erasable programmable logic device (EPLD)
Macrocell array
Programmable logic array (PLA)
Programmable logic device (PLD)
Programmable Array Logic (PAL)
Generic Array Logic (GAL)
Complex programmable logic device (CPLD)
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
Field-programmable object array (FPOA)
Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Theory
Digital signal
Boolean algebra
Logic synthesis
Logic in computer science
Computer architecture
Digital signal
Digital signal processing
Circuit minimization
Switching circuit theory
Gate equivalent
Design
Logic synthesis
Place and route
Placement
Routing
Transaction-level modeling
Register-transfer level
Hardware description language
High-level synthesis
Formal equivalence checking
Synchronous logic
Asynchronous logic
Finite-state machine
Hierarchical state machine
Applications
Computer hardware
Hardware acceleration
Digital audio
radio
Digital photography
Digital telephone
Digital video
cinematography
television
Electronic literature
Design issues
Metastability
Runt pulse





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Place_and_route&oldid=1209983894"
Category: Electronic design automationHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse American English from April 2019All Wikipedia articles written in American English






 This page was last edited on 24 February 2024, at 12:40 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Place and route




























3 languages


Add topic
















