https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_television




Digital television - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Background








1.2
Development








1.3
Inaugural launches










2
Technical information




Toggle Technical information subsection





2.1
Formats and bandwidth








2.2
Reception








2.3
Protection parameters








2.4
Interaction








2.5
1seg










3
Comparison to analog




Toggle Comparison to analog subsection





3.1
Compression artifacts, picture quality monitoring and allocated bandwidth








3.2
Effects of poor reception








3.3
Effect on old analog technology








3.4
Disappearance of TV-audio receivers








3.5
Environmental issues










4
See also








5
References








6
Further reading








7
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Digital television



61 languages




AfrikaansالعربيةAsturianuБеларуская (тарашкевіца)भोजपुरीБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어ՀայերենBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoJawaქართულიລາວLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLombardMagyarBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийScotsසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча / tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣTürkçeУкраїнськаئۇيغۇرچە / UyghurcheTiếng Việt吴语粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Television transmission using digital encoding
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Digital television" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this message)


A map depicting digital terrestrial television standards
List of digital television broadcast standards
DVB standards (countries)
DVB-T (terrestrial)
DVB-T2
DVB-S (satellite)
DVB-S2
DVB-S2X
DVB-C (cable)
DVB-C2
DVB-H (handheld)
DVB-NGH
DVB-T2-Lite
DVB-SH (satellite)
DVB-I (service discovery)

ATSC standards (countries)
ATSC (terrestrial/cable/satellite)
ATSC 2.0
ATSC 3.0
ATSC-M/H (mobile/handheld)

ISDB standards (countries)
ISDB-T (terrestrial)
SBTVD / ISDB-T International
1seg (handheld)
ISDB-Tmm
ISDB-Tsb (radio)
MobaHo! (satellite)
Advanced ISDB-T
ISDB-S (satellite)
ISDB-S3
ISDB-C (cable)

DTMB standards (countries)
DTMB (terrestrial/mobile)
DTMB-A
CMMB (handheld)
ABS-S (satellite)

DMB standard (countries)
T-DMB (mobile/handheld)
HD-DMB
S-DMB (satellite)

Codecs
Video
H.266/MPEG-I Part 3 VVC
H.265/MPEG-H HEVC
H.264/MPEG-4 AVC
MPEG-4 Part 2
H.262/MPEG-2 Part 2
VC-1
AVS3/AVS3-P2
AVS2
AVS+/AVS1-P16
AVS/AVS1-P2
Audio
MPEG-H
AV3A/AVS3-P3
HE-AAC
AAC
AC-4
E-AC-3
AC-3
DRA
MP3
MP2

Terrestrial Frequency bands
VHF
UHF
SHF

Satellite Frequency bands
S band
C band
Ku band
Ka band
vte
Digital television (DTV) is the transmission of television signals using digital encoding, in contrast to the earlier analog television technology which used analog signals. At the time of its development it was considered an innovative advancement and represented the first significant evolution in television technology since color television in the 1950s.[1] Modern digital television is transmitted in high-definition television (HDTV) with greater resolution than analog TV. It typically uses a widescreen aspect ratio (commonly 16:9) in contrast to the narrower format (4:3) of analog TV. It makes more economical use of scarce radio spectrum space; it can transmit up to seven channels in the same bandwidth as a single analog channel,[2] and provides many new features that analog television cannot. A transition from analog to digital broadcasting began around 2000. Different digital television broadcasting standards have been adopted in different parts of the world; below are the more widely used standards:

Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) uses coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) modulation and supports hierarchical transmission. This standard has been adopted in Europe, Africa, Asia and Australia, for a total of approximately 60 countries.
Advanced Television System Committee (ATSC) standard uses eight-level vestigial sideband (8VSB) for terrestrial broadcasting. This standard has been adopted by 9 countries: the United States, Canada, Mexico, South Korea, Bahamas, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Suriname.[citation needed]
Integrated Services Digital Broadcasting (ISDB) is a system designed to provide good reception to fixed receivers and also portable or mobile receivers. It utilizes OFDM and two-dimensional interleaving. It supports hierarchical transmission of up to three layers and uses MPEG-2 video and Advanced Audio Coding. This standard has been adopted in Japan and the Philippines. ISDB-T International is an adaptation of this standard using H.264/MPEG-4 AVC, which has been adopted in most of South America as well as Botswana and Angola.
Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcast (DTMB) adopts time-domain synchronous (TDS) OFDM technology with a pseudo-random signal frame to serve as the guard interval (GI) of the OFDM block and the training symbol. The DTMB standard has been adopted in China, including Hong Kong and Macau.[3]
Digital Multimedia Broadcasting (DMB) is a digital radio transmission technology developed in South Korea[4][5][6] as part of the national information technology project for sending multimedia such as TV, radio and datacasting to mobile devices such as mobile phones, laptops and GPS navigation systems.

History[edit]
Background[edit]
Digital television's roots are tied to the availability of inexpensive, high-performance computers. It was not until the 1990s that digital TV became a real possibility.[7] Digital television was previously not practically feasible due to the impractically high bandwidth requirements of uncompressed video,[8][9] requiring around 200 Mbit/s for a standard-definition television (SDTV) signal,[8] and over 1 Gbit/s for high-definition television (HDTV).[9]

Development[edit]
In the mid-1980s, Toshiba released a television set with digital capabilities, using integrated circuit chips such as a microprocessor to convert analog television broadcast signals to digital video signals, enabling features such as freezing pictures and showing two channels at once. In 1986, Sony and NEC Home Electronics announced their own similar TV sets with digital video capabilities. However, they still relied on analog TV broadcast signals, with true digital TV broadcasts not yet being available at the time.[10][11]
A digital TV broadcast service was proposed in 1986 by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) and the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication (MPT) in Japan, where there were plans to develop an "Integrated Network System" service. However, it was not possible to practically implement such a digital TV service until the adoption of motion-compensated DCT video compression formats such as MPEG made it possible in the early 1990s.[8]
In the mid-1980s, as Japanese consumer electronics firms forged ahead with the development of HDTV technology, and as the MUSE analog format was proposed by Japan's public broadcaster NHK as a worldwide standard. Japanese advancements were seen as pacesetters that threatened to eclipse US electronics companies. Until June 1990, the Japanese MUSE standard—based on an analog system—was the front-runner among the more than 23 different technical concepts under consideration.
Between 1988 and 1991, several European organizations were working on DCT-based digital video coding standards for both SDTV and HDTV. The EU 256 project by the CMTT and ETSI, along with research by Italian broadcaster RAI, developed a DCT video codec that broadcast SDTV at 34 Mbit/s and near-studio-quality HDTV at about 70–140 Mbit/s. RAI demonstrated this with a 1990 FIFA World Cup broadcast in March 1990.[9][12] An American company, General Instrument, also demonstrated the feasibility of a digital television signal in 1990. This led to the FCC being persuaded to delay its decision on an advanced television (ATV) standard until a digitally based standard could be developed.
When it became evident that a digital standard might be achieved in March 1990, the FCC took several important actions. First, the Commission declared that the new TV standard must be more than an enhanced analog signal, but be able to provide a genuine HDTV signal with at least twice the resolution of existing television images. Then, to ensure that viewers who did not wish to buy a new digital television set could continue to receive conventional television broadcasts, it dictated that the new ATV standard must be capable of being simulcast on different channels. The new ATV standard also allowed the new DTV signal to be based on entirely new design principles. Although incompatible with the existing NTSC standard, the new DTV standard would be able to incorporate many improvements.[7]
A universal standard for scanning formats, aspect ratios, or lines of resolution was not produced by the FCC's final standard. This outcome resulted from a dispute between the consumer electronics industry (joined by some broadcasters) and the computer industry (joined by the film industry and some public interest groups) over which of the two scanning processes—interlaced or progressive—is superior. Interlaced scanning, which is used in televisions worldwide, scans even-numbered lines first, then odd-numbered ones. Progressive scanning, which is the format used in computers, scans lines in sequences, from top to bottom. The computer industry argued that progressive scanning is superior because it does not flicker in the manner of interlaced scanning. It also argued that progressive scanning enables easier connections with the Internet and is more cheaply converted to interlaced formats than vice versa. The film industry also supported progressive scanning because it offers a more efficient means of converting filmed programming into digital formats. For their part, the consumer electronics industry and broadcasters argued that interlaced scanning was the only technology that could transmit the highest quality pictures then (and currently) feasible, i.e., 1,080 lines per picture and 1,920 pixels per line. Broadcasters also favored interlaced scanning because their vast archive of interlaced programming is not readily compatible with a progressive format.[7]

Inaugural launches[edit]
DirecTV in the US launched the first commercial digital satellite platform in May 1994, using the Digital Satellite System (DSS) standard.[13][14] Digital cable broadcasts were tested and launched in the US in 1996 by TCI and Time Warner.[15][16] The first digital terrestrial platform was launched in November 1998 as ONdigital in the UK, using the DVB-T standard.[17]

Technical information[edit]
Formats and bandwidth[edit]
Comparison of image quality between ISDB-T (1080i broadcast, top) and NTSC (480i transmission, bottom)
Digital television supports many different picture formats defined by the broadcast television systems which are a combination of size and aspect ratio (width to height ratio).
With digital terrestrial television (DTT) broadcasting, the range of formats can be broadly divided into two categories: high-definition television (HDTV) for the transmission of high-definition video and standard-definition television (SDTV). These terms by themselves are not very precise and many subtle intermediate cases exist.
One of several different HDTV formats that can be transmitted over DTV is: 1280 × 720 pixels in progressive scan mode (abbreviated 720p) or 1920 × 1080 pixels in interlaced video mode (1080i). Each of these uses a 16:9 aspect ratio. HDTV cannot be transmitted over analog television channels because of channel capacity issues.
SDTV, by comparison, may use one of several different formats taking the form of various aspect ratios depending on the technology used in the country of broadcast. NTSC can deliver a 640 × 480 resolution in 4:3 and 854 × 480 in 16:9, while PAL can give 768 × 576 in 4:3 and 1024 × 576 in 16:9. However, broadcasters may choose to reduce these resolutions to reduce bit rate (e.g., many DVB-T channels in the UK use a horizontal resolution of 544 or 704 pixels per line).[18]
Each commercial broadcasting terrestrial television DTV channel in North America is allocated enough bandwidth to broadcast up to 19 megabits per second. However, the broadcaster does not need to use this entire bandwidth for just one broadcast channel. Instead, the broadcast can use Program and System Information Protocol and subdivide across several video subchannels (a.k.a. feeds) of varying quality and compression rates, including non-video datacasting services.
A broadcaster may opt to use a standard-definition (SDTV) digital signal instead of an HDTV signal, because current convention allows the bandwidth of a DTV channel (or "multiplex") to be subdivided into multiple digital subchannels, (similar to what most FM radio stations offer with HD Radio), providing multiple feeds of entirely different television programming on the same channel. This ability to provide either a single HDTV feed or multiple lower-resolution feeds is often referred to as distributing one's bit budget or multicasting. This can sometimes be arranged automatically, using a statistical multiplexer. With some implementations, image resolution may be less directly limited by bandwidth; for example in DVB-T, broadcasters can choose from several different modulation schemes, giving them the option to reduce the transmission bit rate and make reception easier for more distant or mobile viewers.

Reception[edit]
There are several different ways to receive digital television. One of the oldest means of receiving DTV (and TV in general) is from terrestrial transmitters using an antenna (known as an aerial in some countries). This delivery method is known as digital terrestrial television (DTT). With DTT, viewers are limited to channels that have a terrestrial transmitter within range of their antenna.
Other delivery methods include digital cable and digital satellite. In some countries where transmissions of TV signals are normally achieved by microwaves, digital multichannel multipoint distribution service is used. Other standards, such as digital multimedia broadcasting (DMB) and digital video broadcasting - handheld (DVB-H), have been devised to allow handheld devices such as mobile phones to receive TV signals. Another way is Internet Protocol television (IPTV), which is the delivery of TV over a computer network. Finally, an alternative way is to receive digital TV signals via the open Internet (Internet television), whether from a central streaming service or a P2P (peer-to-peer) system.
Some signals are protected by encryption and backed up with the force of law under the WIPO Copyright Treaty and national legislation implementing it, such as the US Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Access to encrypted channels can be controlled by a removable card, for example via the Common Interface or CableCard.

Protection parameters[edit]
Digital television signals must not interfere with each other and they must also coexist with analog television until it is phased out. The following table gives allowable signal-to-noise and signal-to-interference ratios for various interference scenarios. This table is a crucial regulatory tool for controlling the placement and power levels of stations. Digital TV is more tolerant of interference than analog TV.[19]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)


System Parameters(protection ratios)

Canada

US

EBUITU-mode M3

Japan & Brazil[A]


C/N for AWGN Channel

+19.5 dB(16.5 dB[B])

+15.19 dB

+19.3 dB

+19.2 dB


Co-Channel DTV into Analog TV

+33.8 dB

+34.44 dB

+34 ≈37 dB

+38 dB


Co-Channel Analog TV into DTV

+7.2 dB

+1.81 dB

+4 dB

+4 dB


Co-Channel DTV into DTV

+19.5 dB(16.5 dB[B])

+15.27 dB

+19 dB

+19 dB


Lower Adjacent Channel DTV into Analog TV

−16 dB

−17.43 dB

−5 ~ −11 dB[C]

−6 dB


Upper Adjacent Channel DTV into Analog TV

−12 dB

−11.95 dB

−1 ~ −10[C]

−5 dB


Lower Adjacent Channel Analog TV into DTV

−48 dB

−47.33 dB

−34 ~ −37 dB[C]

−35 dB


Upper Adjacent Channel Analog TV into DTV

−49 dB

−48.71 dB

−38 ~ −36 dB[C]

−37 dB


Lower Adjacent Channel DTV into DTV

−27 dB

−28 dB

−30 dB

−28 dB


Upper Adjacent Channel DTV into DTV

−27 dB

−26 dB

−30 dB

−29 dB



^ ISDB-T (6 MHz, 64QAM, R=2/3), Analog TV (M/NTSC).

^ a b The Canadian parameter, C/(N+I) of noise plus co-channel DTV interface should be 16.5 dB.

^ a b c d Depending on analog TV systems used.


Interaction[edit]
People can interact with a DTV system in various ways. One can, for example, browse the electronic program guide. Modern DTV systems sometimes use a return path providing feedback from the end user to the broadcaster. This is possible over cable TV or through an Internet connection but is not possible with a standard antenna alone.
Some of these systems support video on demand using a communication channel localized to a neighborhood rather than a city (terrestrial) or an even larger area (satellite).

1seg[edit]
1seg (1-segment) is a special form of ISDB. Each channel is further divided into 13 segments. Twelve are allocated for HDTV and the other for narrow-band receivers such as mobile televisions and cell phones.

Comparison to analog[edit]
DTV has several advantages over analog television, the most significant being that digital channels take up less bandwidth and the bandwidth allocations are flexible depending on the level of compression and resolution of the transmitted image. This means that digital broadcasters can provide more digital channels in the same space, provide high-definition television service, or provide other non-television services such as multimedia or interactivity. DTV also permits special services such as multiplexing (more than one program on the same channel), electronic program guides and additional languages (spoken or subtitled). The sale of non-television services may provide an additional revenue source to broadcasters.
Digital and analog signals react to interference differently. For example, common problems with analog television include ghosting of images, noise from weak signals and other problems that degrade the quality of the image and sound, although the program material may still be watchable. With digital television, because of the cliff effect, reception of the digital signal must be very nearly complete; otherwise, neither audio nor video will be usable.
Analog TV began with monophonic sound and later developed multichannel television sound with two independent audio signal channels. DTV allows up to 5 audio signal channels plus a subwoofer bass channel, producing broadcasts similar in quality to movie theaters and DVDs.[20]
Digital TV signals require less transmission power than analog TV signals to be broadcast and received satisfactorily.[21]

Compression artifacts, picture quality monitoring and allocated bandwidth[edit]
DTV images have some picture defects that are not present on analog television or motion picture cinema, because of present-day limitations of bit rate and compression algorithms such as MPEG-2. This defect is sometimes referred to as mosquito noise.[22]
Because of the way the human visual system works, defects in an image that are localized to particular features of the image or that come and go are more perceptible than defects that are uniform and constant. However, the DTV system is designed to take advantage of other limitations of the human visual system to help mask these flaws, e.g., by allowing more compression artifacts during fast motion where the eye cannot track and resolve them as easily and, conversely, minimizing artifacts in still backgrounds that, because time allows, may be closely examined in a scene.
Broadcast, cable, satellite and Internet DTV operators control the picture quality of television signal encoders using sophisticated, neuroscience-based algorithms, such as the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) video quality measurement tool. Another tool called visual information fidelity (VIF), is used in the Netflix VMAF video quality monitoring system.
Quantising effects can create contours—rather than smooth gradations—on areas with small graduations in amplitude. Typically, a very flat scene, such as a cloudless sky, will exhibit visible steps across its expanse, often appearing as concentric circles or ellipses. This is known as color banding. Similar effects can be seen in very dark scenes, where true black backgrounds are overlaid by dark gray areas. These transitions may be smooth, or may show a scattering effect as the digital processing dithers and is unable to consistently allocate a value of either absolute black or the next step up the greyscale.

Effects of poor reception[edit]
Changes in signal reception from factors such as degrading antenna connections or changing weather conditions may gradually reduce the quality of analog TV. The nature of digital TV results in a perfectly decodable video initially, until the receiving equipment starts picking up interference that overpowers the desired signal or if the signal is too weak to decode. Some equipment will show a garbled picture with significant damage, while other devices may go directly from perfectly decodable video to no video at all or lock up.[23] This phenomenon is known as the digital cliff effect.[24]
Block errors may occur when transmission is done with compressed images. A block error in a single frame often results in black boxes in several subsequent frames, making viewing difficult.
For remote locations, distant channels that, as analog signals, were previously usable in a snowy and degraded state may, as digital signals, be perfectly decodable or may become completely unavailable. The use of higher frequencies add to these problems, especially in cases where a clear line-of-sight from the receiving antenna to the transmitter is not available because usually higher frequency signals can't pass through obstacles as easily.

Effect on old analog technology[edit]
Television sets with only analog tuners cannot decode digital transmissions. When analog broadcasting over the air ceases, users of sets with analog-only tuners may use other sources of programming (e.g., cable, recorded media) or may purchase set-top converter boxes to tune in the digital signals. In the United States, a government-sponsored coupon was available to offset the cost of an external converter box.
The digital television transition began around the late 1990s and has been completed on a country-by-country basis in most parts of the world.

Disappearance of TV-audio receivers[edit]
Prior to the conversion to digital TV, analog television broadcast audio for TV channels on a separate FM carrier signal from the video signal. This FM audio signal could be heard using standard radios equipped with the appropriate tuning circuits.
However, after the digital television transition, no portable radio manufacturer has yet developed an alternative method for portable radios to play just the audio signal of digital TV channels; DTV radio is not the same thing.

Environmental issues[edit]
The adoption of a broadcast standard incompatible with existing analog receivers has created the problem of large numbers of analog receivers being discarded. One superintendent of public works was quoted in 2009 saying; "some of the studies I’ve read in the trade magazines say up to a quarter of American households could be throwing a TV out in the next two years following the regulation change."[25] In Michigan in 2009, one recycler estimated that as many as one household in four would dispose of or recycle a TV set in the following year.[26] The digital television transition, migration to high-definition television receivers and the replacement of CRTs with flat screens are all factors in the increasing number of discarded analog CRT-based television receivers. In 2009, an estimated 99 million analog TV receivers were sitting unused in homes in the US alone and, while some obsolete receivers are being retrofitted with converters, many more are simply dumped in landfills where they represent a source of toxic metals such as lead as well as lesser amounts of materials such as barium, cadmium and chromium.[27][28]

See also[edit]
Autoroll
Digital television in the United Kingdom
Digital television in the United States
Text to speech in digital television
References[edit]


^ Kruger, Lennard G. (2002). Digital Television: An Overview. New York: Nova Publishers. ISBN 1-59033-502-3.

^ "HDTV Set Top Boxes and Digital TV Broadcast Information". Archived from the original on 22 May 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2014.

^ Ong, C. Y., Song, J., Pan, C., & Li, Y.(2010, May). Technology and Standards of Digital Television Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting [Topics in Wireless Communications], IEEE Communications Magazine, 48(5),119–127

^ "Korea's Terrestrial DMB: Germany to begin broadcast this May". ZDNet Korea. 2006-04-06. Retrieved 2010-06-17.

^ "picturephoning.com: DMB". Textually.org. Archived from the original on 2010-08-09. Retrieved 2010-06-17.

^ "South Korea : Social Media 답변 내용 : 악어새 – 리포트월드". Reportworld.co.kr. Archived from the original on 2009-08-17. Retrieved 2010-06-17.

^ a b c "The Origins and Future Prospects of Digital Television". Benton Foundation. 2008-12-23.

^ a b c Lea, William (1994). Video on demand: Research Paper 94/68. House of Commons Library. Retrieved 20 September 2019.

^ a b c Barbero, M.; Hofmann, H.; Wells, N. D. (14 November 1991). "DCT source coding and current implementations for HDTV". EBU Technical Review (251). European Broadcasting Union: 22–33. Retrieved 4 November 2019.

^ Meigs, James B. (June 1986). "Home Video: Get set for digital". Popular Mechanics. Vol. 163, no. 6. Hearst Magazines. p. 52. ISSN 0032-4558.

^ Bateman, Selby (April 1986). "New Technologies: The Converging Digital Universe". Compute!. No. 71. pp. 21-29 (26-8).

^ Barbero, M.; Stroppiana, M. (October 1992). "Data compression for HDTV transmission and distribution". IEE Colloquium on Applications of Video Compression in Broadcasting: 10/1–10/5.

^ "History of U.S. Satellite Broadcasting Company, Inc. – FundingUniverse". www.fundinguniverse.com. Retrieved 9 August 2018.

^ "Business Insider: Digital satellite TV has Indy roots". Retrieved 9 August 2018.

^ "NextLevel signs cable deal - Dec. 17, 1997". money.cnn.com. Retrieved 9 August 2018.

^ "TCI faces big challenges - Aug. 15, 1996". money.cnn.com. Retrieved 9 August 2018.

^ "CANAL+ TECHNOLOGIES and the world's first digital terrestrial television service in the United Kingdom". Retrieved 9 August 2018.

^ Latest snapshots - Freeview/DTT bitrates Archived 2007-11-22 at the Wayback Machine (Mendip transmitter, UK)

^ "Frequently Asked Questions -- What Is Digital TV?". ABC News. Retrieved 2020-09-30.

^ "Digital TV: A Cringley Crash Course — Digital Vs. Analog". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2014-01-13.

^ "Report ITU-R BT.2140-3 (05/2011)" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 June 2020.

^ Le Dinh, Phuc-Tue; Patry, Jacques (February 24, 2006). "Video compression artifacts and MPEG noise reduction". Video Imaging DesignLine. Archived from the original on March 14, 2006. Retrieved April 30, 2010.

^ "Digital TV Info". Antenna Direct. 2013-09-25. Retrieved 2022-07-22.

^ "Steering clear of the digital cliff". Connected Magazine. 2010-03-01. Retrieved 2024-01-05.

^ North Tonawanda: council discusses future TV disposal Archived 2009-01-31 at the Wayback Machine, Neale Gulley, Tonawanda News, January 27, 2009

^ Trashing the tube: Digital conversion may spark glut of toxic waste, Jennifer Chambers, Detroit News, January 23, 2009

^ Old Toxic TVs Cause Problems, USA TODAY, January 27, 2009

^ Unloading that old TV not quite so simple, Lee Bergquist, Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel, January 23, 2009


Further reading[edit]
Hart, Jeffrey A., Television, technology, and competition : HDTV and digital TV in the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, New York : Cambridge University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-521-82624-1
Overview of Digital Television Development Worldwide Proceedings of the IEEE, VOL. 94, NO. 1, JANUARY 2006 (University of Texas at San Antonio)
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Digital television.

The FCC's US consumer-oriented DTV website Archived 2011-07-23 at the Wayback Machine
vteDigital television deployments by country
Australia
Bulgaria
Canada
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
Indonesia
Ireland
Malaysia
Netherlands
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Sweden
Thailand
United Kingdom
United States
transition
Digital television transition
vteBroadcastingMedium
Radio
Radio program
Cable
Digital
Satellite
Mobile computing
Mobile television
Teletext
Television
Television show
Analog
Cable
Digital
Digital terrestrial television
Satellite
Internet television and radio (Webcast
Streaming media
Web television
Peer-to-peer television
BitTorrent television and movies)
Broadcastingniche
Campus radio
Commercial broadcasting
Community radio
Multichannel television
Pay television
Pay-per-view
News broadcasting
Pirate radio / Pirate television
Public broadcasting
Religious broadcasting
Talk radio
Specialtychannels
Adult television channels
Children's interest channel / Children's television series
Documentary channel
Men's interest channel
Movie television channels
Music radio / Music television
Quiz channel
Shopping channel
News broadcasting
Business channels
Public affairs
Livestreamed news
Sports broadcasting
Women's interest channel
Productionand funding
Broadcast network
Broadcast-safe
Broadcast television systems
Graphics
Digital on-screen graphic
Lower third
News ticker
On-screen display
Score bug
Television news screen layout
Network affiliate
Occupations
Broadcast designer
Broadcast license
Director of network programming
Outside broadcasting
Press box
Press pool
Television licence
Television studio

vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Phryctoria
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Donald Davies
Daniel Davis Jr.
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Lee de Forest
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Roberto Landell
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Internet pioneers
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Network switching
circuit
packet
Nodes
terminal
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
Global telecommunications regulation bodies

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

vteDigital electronicsComponents
Transistor
Resistor
Inductor
Capacitor
Printed electronics
Printed circuit board
Electronic circuit
Flip-flop
Memory cell
Combinational logic
Sequential logic
Logic gate
Boolean circuit
Integrated circuit (IC)
Hybrid integrated circuit (HIC)
Mixed-signal integrated circuit
Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC)
Emitter-coupled logic (ECL)
Erasable programmable logic device (EPLD)
Macrocell array
Programmable logic array (PLA)
Programmable logic device (PLD)
Programmable Array Logic (PAL)
Generic Array Logic (GAL)
Complex programmable logic device (CPLD)
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
Field-programmable object array (FPOA)
Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Theory
Digital signal
Boolean algebra
Logic synthesis
Logic in computer science
Computer architecture
Digital signal
Digital signal processing
Circuit minimization
Switching circuit theory
Gate equivalent
Design
Logic synthesis
Place and route
Placement
Routing
Transaction-level modeling
Register-transfer level
Hardware description language
High-level synthesis
Formal equivalence checking
Synchronous logic
Asynchronous logic
Finite-state machine
Hierarchical state machine
Applications
Computer hardware
Hardware acceleration
Digital audio
radio
Digital photography
Digital telephone
Digital video
cinematography
television
Electronic literature
Design issues
Metastability
Runt pulse

Authority control databases: National GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicIsrael




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_television&oldid=1275808059"
Categories: Digital televisionTelevision technologyTelevision terminologyDigital technologyJapanese inventionsTelecommunications-related introductions in the 1990sHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from May 2010All articles needing additional referencesUse American English from November 2023All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2021Articles needing additional references from May 2023Commons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 05:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Digital television




























61 languages


Add topic
















