https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touchpad




Touchpad - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Operation and function








2
History








3
Use in devices








4
Theory of operation








5
Manufacturing








6
See also








7
References








8
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Touchpad



43 languages




العربيةБеларускаяБългарскиČeštinaDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어ՀայերենBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתҚазақшаKiswahiliLatviešuLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаپښتوPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Type of pointing device
Closeup of a touchpad on an Acer CB5-311 laptop
Closeup of a touchpad on a MacBook 2015 laptop
A touchpad or trackpad is a type of pointing device.  Its largest component is a tactile sensor: an electronic device with a flat surface, that detects the motion and position of a user's fingers, and translates them to 2D motion, to control a pointer in a graphical user interface on a computer screen. Touchpads are common on laptop computers, contrasted with desktop computers, where mice are more prevalent. Trackpads are sometimes used with desktop setups where desk space is scarce. Wireless touchpads are also available, as detached accessories. Due to the ability of trackpads to be made small, they were additionally used on personal digital assistants (PDAs) and some portable media players.


Operation and function[edit]
Touchpads operate in several ways, including capacitive sensing or resistive touchscreen. The most common technology used in the 2010s senses the change of capacitance where a finger touches the pad. Capacitance-based touchpads will not sense the tip of a pencil or other similar ungrounded or non-conducting implements. Fingers insulated by a glove may also be problematic, and capacitive touchpads are rarely used as pointing devices for medical hardware.[1]
Like touchscreens, touchpads sense absolute position but their resolution is limited by their size. For common use as a pointer device, the dragging motion of a finger is translated into a finer, relative motion of the cursor on the output to the display on the operating system, analogous to the handling of a mouse that is lifted and put back on a surface.  Hardware buttons equivalent to a standard mouse's left and right buttons are sometimes positioned adjacent to the touchpad.
Some touchpads and associated device driver software may interpret tapping the pad as a mouse click, and a tap followed by a continuous pointing motion (a "click-and-a-half") can indicate dragging.[2] Tactile touchpads allow for clicking and dragging by incorporating button functionality into the surface of the touchpad itself.[3][4] To select, one presses down on the touchpad instead of a physical button.  To drag, instead of performing the "click-and-a-half" technique, the user presses down while on the object, drags without releasing pressure, and lets go when done. Touchpad drivers can also allow the use of multiple fingers to emulate the other mouse buttons (commonly two-finger tapping for right click).
Touchpads are called clickpads if they rely on software buttons rather than physical buttons. Physically the whole clickpad formed a button, logically the driver interprets a click as a left or right button click depending on the placement of fingers.[5]
Some touchpads have "hotspots", locations on the touchpad used for functionality beyond a mouse. For example, on certain touchpads, moving the finger along an edge of the touch pad will act as a scroll wheel, controlling the scrollbar and scrolling the window that has the focus, vertically or horizontally.  Many touchpads use two-finger dragging for scrolling.  Also, some touchpad drivers support tap zones, regions where a tap will execute a function, for example, pausing a media player or launching an application. All of these functions are implemented in the touchpad device driver software, and can be disabled.

History[edit]
In 1980, Xerox offered one of the first, if not the first, touchpads on a computer system with their Xerox 860, a word processing workstation aimed at medium- and large-sized businesses.[6][7] Embedded on the Xerox 860's keyboard, to the right of the keys, is the circular touchpad, which Xerox dubbed the "Cat" (short for capacitance-activated transducer). Xerox offered the Cat as an alternative input method for selecting strings of text to copy, delete, insert, or move around the document.[8][9][6]: 30 
By 1982, Apollo desktop computers were equipped with a touchpad on the right side of the keyboard.[10] Introduced a year later, in 1983, the first battery-powered clamshell laptop, the Gavilan SC included a touchpad, which was mounted above its keyboard, rather than below, which became the norm.[11]
Psion's MC 200/400/600/WORD Series,[12] introduced in 1989, came with a new mouse-replacing input device similar to a touchpad,[13] although more closely resembling a graphics tablet, as the cursor was positioned by clicking on a specific point on the pad, instead of moving it in the direction of a stroke.[14]
Laptops with touchpads were launched by Olivetti and Triumph-Adler in 1992.[15] Cirque introduced the first widely available touchpad, branded as GlidePoint, in 1994.[16][17] Apple introduced touchpads with modern placing in the PowerBook 500 series in 1994, using Cirque's GlidePoint technology,[18][19] which Apple refers to as a "trackpad"; it replaced the trackball of previous PowerBook models. Since 2008, Apple's revisions of the MacBook and MacBook Pro incorporated a "Tactile Touchpad" design with a button integrated into the tracking surface[3][4][20] (the lower part of the touchpad surface acts as a clickable button).[21]
Another early adopter of the GlidePoint pointing device was Sharp.[16]  Later, Synaptics introduced their touchpad into the marketplace, branded the TouchPad, and Epson was an early adopter of this product with their ActionNote.[16]
As touchpads began to be introduced in laptops in the 1990s, there was often confusion as to what the product should be called.  No consistent term was used, and references varied, such as: glidepoint, touch sensitive input device, touchpad, trackpad, and pointing device.[22][23][24]
Users were often presented with the option to purchase a pointing stick, touchpad, or trackball.  Combinations of the devices were common, though touchpads and trackballs were rarely included together.[25] Since the early 2000s, touchpads have become the dominant laptop pointing device as most consumer laptops produced during this period and beyond includes only touchpads, displacing the pointing stick.

Use in devices[edit]
Optical trackpad of the BlackBerry Curve 8520 in the red circle
A Microsoft Surface tablet. The touchpad is the rectangle near the bottom of the keyboard.
Touchpads are primarily used in self-contained portable laptop computers and do not require a flat surface near the machine. The touchpad is close to the keyboard, and relatively short finger movements are required to move the cursor across the display screen; while advantageous, this also makes it possible for a user's palm or wrist to move the mouse cursor accidentally while typing. Laptops today feature multitouch touchpads that can sense in some cases up to five fingers simultaneously, providing more options for input, such as the ability to bring up the context menu by tapping two fingers, dragging two fingers for scrolling, or gestures for zoom in/out or rotate. The touchpads with physical buttons now are only hi-end business/professional laptops option.
One-dimensional touchpads are the primary control interface for menu navigation on iPod Classic portable music players and additional input method on some Wacom digitizer tablets, where they are referred to as "click wheels", since they only sense motion along one axis, which is wrapped around like a wheel. Creative Labs also uses a touchpad for their Zen line of MP3 players, beginning with the Zen Touch. The second-generation Microsoft Zune product line (the Zune 80/120 and Zune 4/8) uses touch for the Zune Pad.
Touchpads also exist for desktop computers as an external peripheral, albeit rarely seen. But touchpad layer can be integrated with graphics tablet as additional input option.
External computer keyboards can be equipped with integrated touchpads[26] (particularly keyboards oriented for HTPC use), and some keyboards can have only touch input surface instead of hardware buttons (a typical solution for clean rooms).[27]
Optical trackpads primary can be used as part of ultraportable electronics; some handheld laptops and early smartphones can be equipped with optical trackpads.
On September 9, 2024, Apple unveiled the iPhone 16, iPhone 16 Plus, iPhone 16 Pro and iPhone 16 Pro Max to feature the single one-dimensional trackpad next to the side button called "Camera Control" which allows the users to take an easier way to take a photos and videos, the force sensor to distinguish between the firm press and the light press and the capacitance touch sensor to distinguish sliding with finger for adjusting the zoom, exposure or depth-of-field.[28][29]

Theory of operation[edit]
There are two principal means by which touchpads work: the matrix approach and the capacitive shunt method.[citation needed] In the matrix approach, a series of conductors are arranged in an array of parallel lines in two layers, separated by an insulator and crossing each other at right angles to form a grid.  A high frequency signal is applied sequentially between pairs in this two-dimensional grid array.  The current that passes between the nodes is proportional to the capacitance. When a virtual ground, such as a finger, is placed over one of the intersections between the conductive layer some of the electrical field is shunted to this ground point, resulting in a change in the apparent capacitance at that location. This method received U.S. patent 5,305,017 awarded to George Gerpheide in April 1994.
The capacitive shunt method, described in an application note by manufacturer Analog Devices,[30] senses the change in capacitance between a transmitter and receiver that are on opposite sides of the sensor. The transmitter creates an electric field which oscillates at 200–300 kHz. If a ground point, such as the finger, is placed between the transmitter and receiver, some of the field lines are shunted away, decreasing the apparent capacitance.
Trackpads such as those found in some Blackberry smartphones work optically, like an optical computer mouse.

Manufacturing[edit]
Major manufacturers include:[citation needed]

Alps Electric
Elan Microelectronics
Cirque Corporation
Synaptics
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Touchpads.




Look up touchpad, trackpad, or touchscreen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Capacitive sensing
Graphics tablet
Kaoss Pad
List of touch input manufacturers
Magic Trackpad
Multi-touch
Pointing stick
References[edit]


^ "VersaPad Plus resistive touchpads target medical, rugged environments". www.microcontrollertips.com. Retrieved 2021-07-06.

^ "Tap and drag". Apple.com.

^ a b "The Tactile Touchpad". sigchi.com. Archived from the original on 2011-10-01. Retrieved 2011-03-21.

^ a b "A Comparison of Three Selection Techniques for Touchpads" (PDF). yorku.ca.

^ "Libinput features: Clickpad software button behavior". wayland.freedesktop.org.

^ a b Valigra, L. (June 1981). "Xerox's 'Star' shines on professionals". Mini-Micro Systems. 14 (6). Reed Business Information: 23 et seq – via Gale.

^ Grünberg, Serge; Claudine Paquot (2006). David Cronenberg: Interviews with Serge Grünberg. Plexus Publishing. p. 79. ISBN 9780859653763 – via Google Books.

^ Williford, J. M. (1984). Word Processing on the Xerox 860 (PDF). John Wiley & Sons. pp. 15–16. ISBN 0-471-88257-7 – via Bitsavers.org.

^ Flores, Ivan (1983). Word Processing Handbook. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. p. 177. ISBN 9780442225261 – via Google Books.

^ Getting Started With Your DOMAIN System. Apollo Computer. 1983.

^ "Briefcase computer". Design. November 1983. p. 20. Retrieved 16 March 2022. The Gavilan portable computer uses a touch-sensitive panel between its text-entry keyboard and its liquid-crystal display. Moving your finger around on this shifts the cursor on the screen to select commands from a menu.

^ "GUIdebook Psion MC Series brochure". guidebookgallery.org.

^ "GUIdebook Psion MC Series brochure, page 4". guidebookgallery.org.

^ Booth, Neil (2 December 1989). "Psions of the Times". New Computer Express. pp. 66–67. Retrieved 20 March 2022. You put your finger on a small rectangular panel, and the cursor appears on screen. Move your finger around the panel, say from the bottom left of the panel to the centre, and the cursor moves from the bottom left to the centre of the screen in parallel.

^ "Olivetti S20, D33 and identically Triumph-Adler Walkstation 386, Walkstation 386SX". Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2015-10-26.

^ a b c Diehl, Stanford; Lennon, Anthony J.; McDonough, John (Oct 1995). "Touchpads to Navigate By" (PDF). Byte. No. October 1995. Green Publishing. p. 150. ISSN 0360-5280.

^ "[Products | Our Technology | High-Sensitivity Capacitive Technology] Alps Alpine – Electronic Components and Automotive Infotainment". tech.alpsalpine.com. Retrieved 2021-07-06.

^ Thryft, Ann R. "More Than a Mouse," Computer Product Development, EBN Extra, November 14, 1994, pp. E16 – E20

^ "Blackbird: The PowerBook 500 Series". Low End Mac. 1994-05-16. Retrieved 2017-07-09.

^ "MacBook design". Apple.com.

^ Ackerman, Dan (June 10, 2009). "Apple MacBook Pro Summer 2009 (Core 2 Duo 2.26 GHz, 2GB RAM, 160GB HDD, Nvidia GeForce 9400M, 13-inch)". CNET. Retrieved April 11, 2010.

^ "A WinBook for the Fussy". Windows Magazine. No. Dec 95. 1995. p. 105.

^ "Sharp Unveils Line of Notebooks". Westchester County Business Journal (November 20, 1995). 1995.

^ Malloy, Rich; Crabb, Don (October 1995). "Power Packed Power Books". Mobile Office (October 1995). New York, NY: 44–52.

^ Jerome, Marty (1995). "Lightweight, Low-Cost Challenger". PC Computing (December 1995): 96.

^ Yu, Justin. "This Logitech keyboard and touch pad would like the full attention of your hands". CNET. Retrieved 2021-07-06.

^ GmbH, Systec & Solutions. "Medical keyboard and stainless steel tablet". www.systec-solutions.com. Retrieved 2021-07-06.

^ "Apple introduces iPhone 16 and iPhone 16 Plus". Apple Newsroom. Retrieved 2024-09-14.

^ "Apple debuts iPhone 16 Pro and iPhone 16 Pro Max". Apple Newsroom. Retrieved 2024-09-14.

^ "Analog Devices' Capacitive Shunt Method" (PDF). analog.com.


External links[edit]
Annotated Bibliography of References to Gestures, Touchscreens, and Pen Computing
Notes on the History of Pen-based Computing on YouTube
vteBasic computer componentsInput devicesPointing devices
Graphics tablet
Game controller
Light pen
Mouse
Optical
Optical trackpad
Pointing stick
Touchpad
Touchscreen
Trackball
Other
Keyboard
Image scanner
Graphics card
GPU
Microphone
Refreshable braille display
Sound card
Sound chip
Webcam
Softcam
Output devices
Monitor
Screen
Refreshable braille display
Printer
Plotter
Speakers
Sound card
Graphics card
Removable  data storage
Disk pack
Floppy disk
Optical disc
CD
DVD
Blu-ray
Flash memory
Memory card
USB flash drive
Computer case
Central processing unit
Microprocessor
Motherboard
Memory
RAM
BIOS
Data storage
HDD
SSD (SATA / NVMe)
SSHD
Power supply
SMPS
MOSFET
Power MOSFET
VRM
Network interface controller
Fax modem
Expansion card
PortsCurrent
Ethernet
USB
Thunderbolt
Analog audio jack
DisplayPort
HDMI
Obsolete
FireWire (IEEE 1394)
Parallel port
Serial port
Game port
PS/2 port
eSATA
DVI
VGA
Related
History of computing hardware
History of computing hardware (1960s–present)
List of pioneers in computer science

Authority control databases: National Germany




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Touchpad&oldid=1280419793"
Categories: History of human–computer interactionPointing devicesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2011Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021Commons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 14:48 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Touchpad




























43 languages


Add topic
















