https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_signal




Digital signal - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Definitions




Toggle Definitions subsection





1.1
In digital electronics








1.2
In signal processing








1.3
In communications










2
Logic voltage levels








3
Modulation








4
Clocking








5
See also








6
References








7
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Digital signal



43 languages




العربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяБългарскиCatalàЧӑвашлаDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어हिन्दीIdoBahasa IndonesiaIsiZuluItalianoעבריתҚазақшаKurdîМакедонскиमराठीBahasa Melayu日本語PolskiPortuguêsQaraqalpaqshaRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Signal used to represent data as a sequence of discrete values
This article is about digital signals in electronics. For digital data and systems, see Digital data. For digital signals that specifically represent analog waveforms, see Digital signal (signal processing). For other uses, see Digital signal (disambiguation).
For broader coverage of this topic, see Signal.


A binary signal, also known as a logic signal, is a digital signal with two distinguishable levels
A digital signal is a signal that represents data as a sequence of discrete values; at any given time it can only take on, at most, one of a finite number of values.[1][2][3] This contrasts with an analog signal, which represents continuous values; at any given time it represents a real number within a continuous range of values.
Simple digital signals represent information in discrete bands of levels. All levels within a band of values represent the same information state.[1] In most digital circuits, the signal can have two possible valid values; this is called a binary signal or logic signal.[4]  They are represented by two voltage bands: one near a reference value (typically termed as ground or zero volts), and the other a value near the supply voltage. These correspond to the two values zero and one (or false and true) of the Boolean domain, so at any given time a binary signal represents one binary digit (bit).  Because of this discretization, relatively small changes to the signal levels do not leave the discrete envelope, and as a result are ignored by signal state sensing circuitry.  As a result, digital signals have noise immunity; electronic noise, provided it is not too great, will not affect digital circuits, whereas noise always degrades the operation of analog signals to some degree.[5]
Digital signals having more than two states are occasionally used; circuitry using such signals is called multivalued logic.  For example, signals that can assume three possible states are called three-valued logic.
In a digital signal, the physical quantity representing the information may be a variable electric current or voltage, the intensity, phase or polarization of an optical or other electromagnetic field, acoustic pressure, the magnetization of a magnetic storage media, etcetera. Digital signals are used in all digital electronics, notably computing equipment and data transmission.

A received digital signal may be impaired by noise and distortions without necessarily affecting the digits

Definitions[edit]
The term digital signal has related definitions in different contexts.

In digital electronics[edit]
A five level PAM digital signal
In digital electronics, a digital signal is a pulse amplitude modulated signal, i.e. a sequence of fixed-width electrical pulses or light pulses, each occupying one of a discrete number of levels of amplitude.[6][7] A special case is a logic signal or a binary signal, which varies between a low and a high signal level.
The pulse trains in digital circuits are typically generated by metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) devices, due to their rapid on–off electronic switching speed and large-scale integration (LSI) capability.[8][9] In contrast, bipolar junction transistors more slowly generate signals resembling sine waves.[8]


In signal processing[edit]
In signal processing, a digital signal is an abstraction that is discrete in time and amplitude, meaning it only exists at certain time instants.
Main article: Digital signal (signal processing)
In digital signal processing, a digital signal is a representation of a physical signal that is sampled and quantized. A digital signal is an abstraction that is discrete in time and amplitude. The signal's value only exists at regular time intervals, since only the values of the corresponding physical signal at those sampled moments are significant for further digital processing. The digital signal is a sequence of codes drawn from a finite set of values.[10] The digital signal may be stored, processed or transmitted physically as a pulse-code modulation (PCM) signal.


In communications[edit]
A frequency-shift keying (FSK) signal is alternating between two waveforms and allows passband transmission. It is considered a means of digital data transmission.
An AMI coded digital signal used in baseband transmission (line coding)
In digital communications, a digital signal is a continuous-time physical signal, alternating between a discrete number of waveforms,[3] representing a bitstream. The shape of the waveform depends on the transmission scheme, which may be either a line coding scheme allowing baseband transmission; or a digital modulation scheme, allowing passband transmission over long wires or over a limited radio frequency band. Such a carrier-modulated sine wave is considered a digital signal in literature on digital communications and data transmission,[11] but considered as a bit stream converted to an analog signal in specific cases where the signal will be carried over a system meant for analog communication, such as an analog telephone line.[12]
In communications, sources of interference are usually present, and noise is frequently a significant problem. The effects of interference are typically minimized by filtering off interfering signals as much as possible and by using data redundancy. The main advantages of digital signals for communications are often considered to be noise immunity, and the ability, in many cases such as with audio and video data, to use data compression to greatly decrease the bandwidth that is required on the communication media.


Logic voltage levels[edit]
A logic signal waveform: (1) low level, (2) high level, (3) rising edge, and (4) falling edge.
Main article: Logic level
A waveform that switches representing the two states of a Boolean value (0 and 1, or low and high, or false and true) is referred to as a digital signal or logic signal or binary signal when it is interpreted in terms of only two possible digits.
The two states are usually represented by some measurement of an electrical property: Voltage is the most common, but current is used in some logic families. Two ranges of voltages are typically defined for each logic family, which are frequently not directly adjacent. The signal is low when in the low range and high when in the high range, and in between the two ranges the behavior can vary between different types of gates.
The clock signal is a special digital signal that is used to synchronize many digital circuits. The image shown can be considered the waveform of a clock signal. Logic changes are triggered either by the rising edge or the falling edge. The rising edge is the transition from a low voltage (level 1 in the diagram) to a high voltage (level 2). The falling edge is the transition from a high voltage to a low one.
Although in a highly simplified and idealized model of a digital circuit, we may wish for these transitions to occur instantaneously, no real-world circuit is purely resistive and therefore no circuit can instantly change voltage levels.  This means that during a short, finite transition time the output may not properly reflect the input, and will not correspond to either a logically high or low voltage.

Modulation[edit]
Main article: Modulation § Digital modulation methods
To create a digital signal, a signal must be modulated with a control signal to produce it. The simplest modulation, a type of unipolar encoding, is simply to switch on and off a DC signal so that high voltages represent a '1' and low voltages are '0'.
In digital radio schemes one or more carrier waves are amplitude, frequency or phase modulated by the control signal to produce a digital signal suitable for transmission.
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) over telephone wires, does not primarily use binary logic; the digital signals for individual carriers are modulated with different valued logics, depending on the Shannon capacity of the individual channel.

Clocking[edit]
Clocking digital signals through a clocked flip-flop
Digital signals may be sampled by a clock signal at regular intervals by passing the signal through a flip-flop. When this is done, the input is measured at the clock edge and the signal from that time. The signal is then held steady until the next clock. This process is the basis of synchronous logic.
Asynchronous logic also exists, which uses no single clock, and generally operates more quickly, and may use less power, but is significantly harder to design.


See also[edit]
Intersymbol interference
References[edit]


^ a b Robert K. Dueck (2005). Digital Design with CPLD Applications and VHDL. Thomson/Delmar Learning. ISBN 1401840302. Archived from the original on 2017-12-17. Retrieved 2017-08-30. A digital representation can have only specific discrete values

^ Proakis, John G.; Manolakis, Dimitris G. (2007-01-01). Digital Signal Processing. Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 9780131873742. Archived from the original on 2016-05-20. Retrieved 2015-09-22.

^ a b Analogue and Digital Communication Techniques Archived 2017-12-17 at the Wayback Machine: "A digital signal is a complex waveform and can be defined as a discrete waveform having a finite set of levels"

^ "Digital Signal". Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2016-08-13.

^ Horowitz, Paul; Hill, Winfield (1989). The Art Of Electronics, 2nd Ed. Cambridge University Press. pp. 471–473. ISBN 0521370957.

^ B. SOMANATHAN NAIR (2002). Digital electronics and logic design. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 289. ISBN 9788120319561. Digital signals are fixed-width pulses, which occupy only one of two levels of amplitude.

^ Joseph Migga Kizza (2005). Computer Network Security. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9780387204734.

^ a b "Applying MOSFETs to Today's Power-Switching Designs". Electronic Design. 23 May 2016. Archived from the original on 10 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019.

^ 2000 Solved Problems in Digital Electronics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. 2005. p. 151. ISBN 978-0-07-058831-8.

^ Vinod Kumar Khanna (2009). Digital Signal Processing. S. Chand. p. 3. ISBN 9788121930956. A digital signal is a special form of discrete-time signal which is discrete in both time and amplitude, obtained by permitting each value (sample) of a discrete-time signal to acquire a finite set of values (quantization), assigning it a numerical symbol according to a code ... A digital signal is a sequence or list of numbers drawn from a finite set.

^ J.S.Chitode, Communication Systems, 2008: "When a digital signal is transmitted over a long distance, it needs CW modulation."

^ Fred Halsall, Computer Networking and the Internet: "In order to transmit a digital signal over an analog subscriber line, modulated transmission must be used; that is the electrical signal that represents the binary bit stream of the source (digital) output must first be converted to an analog signal that is compatible with a (telephony) speech signal."


External links[edit]
Monty Montgomory. Digital Show & Tell.
CodSim 2.0: Open source Virtual Laboratory for Digital Data Communications Model Department of Computer Architecture, University of Malaga. Simulates Digital line encodings and Digital Modulations. Written in HTML for any web browser.
vteDigital electronicsComponents
Transistor
Resistor
Inductor
Capacitor
Printed electronics
Printed circuit board
Electronic circuit
Flip-flop
Memory cell
Combinational logic
Sequential logic
Logic gate
Boolean circuit
Integrated circuit (IC)
Hybrid integrated circuit (HIC)
Mixed-signal integrated circuit
Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC)
Emitter-coupled logic (ECL)
Erasable programmable logic device (EPLD)
Macrocell array
Programmable logic array (PLA)
Programmable logic device (PLD)
Programmable Array Logic (PAL)
Generic Array Logic (GAL)
Complex programmable logic device (CPLD)
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA)
Field-programmable object array (FPOA)
Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Theory
Digital signal
Boolean algebra
Logic synthesis
Logic in computer science
Computer architecture
Digital signal
Digital signal processing
Circuit minimization
Switching circuit theory
Gate equivalent
Design
Logic synthesis
Place and route
Placement
Routing
Transaction-level modeling
Register-transfer level
Hardware description language
High-level synthesis
Formal equivalence checking
Synchronous logic
Asynchronous logic
Finite-state machine
Hierarchical state machine
Applications
Computer hardware
Hardware acceleration
Digital audio
radio
Digital photography
Digital telephone
Digital video
cinematography
television
Electronic literature
Design issues
Metastability
Runt pulse

vteLine coding (digital baseband transmission)Main articles
Unipolar encoding
Bipolar encoding
On–off keying
Mark and space
Basic line codes
Return to zero (RZ)
Non-return-to-zero, level (NRZ/NRZ-L)
Non-return-to-zero, inverted (NRZ-I)
Non-return-to-zero, space (NRZ-S)
Manchester
Differential Manchester/biphase (Bi-φ)
Extended line codes
Conditioned diphase
4B3T
4B5B
2B1Q
Alternate mark inversion
Modified AMI code
Coded mark inversion
MLT-3 encoding
Hybrid ternary code
6b/8b encoding
8b/10b encoding
64b/66b encoding
Eight-to-fourteen modulation
Delay/Miller encoding
TC-PAM
Optical line codes
Carrier-suppressed return-to-zero
Alternate-phase return-to-zero

See also: Baseband
Baud
Bit rate
Digital signal
Digital transmission
Ethernet physical layer
Pulse modulation methods
Pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM)
Pulse-code modulation (PCM)
Serial communication
Category:Line codes

vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Phryctoria
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Donald Davies
Daniel Davis Jr.
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Lee de Forest
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Roberto Landell
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Internet pioneers
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Network switching
circuit
packet
Nodes
terminal
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania
Global telecommunications regulation bodies

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

Authority control databases: National GermanyCzech Republic




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_signal&oldid=1286949068"
Category: TelecommunicationsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse American English from January 2025All Wikipedia articles written in American English






 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 01:01 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Digital signal




























43 languages


Add topic
















