https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point-contact_transistor




Point-contact transistor - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Forming








2
Characteristics








3
See also








4
References








5
Further reading








6
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Point-contact transistor



11 languages




العربيةCatalàDeutschEspañolفارسیBahasa Indonesia日本語PolskiPortuguêsRomânăTürkçe

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


First successful type of transistor, developed in 1947
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Point-contact transistor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
A stylized replica of the point-contact transistor invented at Bell Labs on December 23, 1947
The point-contact transistor was the first type of transistor to be successfully demonstrated. It was developed by research scientists John Bardeen and Walter Brattain at Bell Laboratories in December 1947.[1][2] They worked in a group led by physicist William Shockley. The group had been working together on experiments and theories of electric field effects in solid state materials, with the aim of replacing vacuum tubes with a smaller device that consumed less power.
The critical experiment, carried out on December 16, 1947, consisted of a block of germanium, a semiconductor, with two very closely spaced gold contacts held against it by a spring. Brattain attached a small strip of gold foil over the point of a plastic triangle—a configuration which is essentially a point-contact diode. He then carefully sliced through the gold at the tip of the triangle. This produced two electrically isolated gold contacts very close to each other.

An early model of a transistor
The piece of germanium used a surface layer with an excess of electrons. When an electric signal traveled in through the gold foil, it injected electron holes (points which lack electrons). This created a thin layer which had a scarcity of electrons.
A small positive current applied to one of the two contacts had an influence on the current which flowed between the other contact and the base upon which the block of germanium was mounted. In fact, a small change in the first contact current caused a greater change in the second contact current; thus it was an amplifier. The low-current input terminal into the point-contact transistor is the emitter, while the output high-current terminals are the base and collector. This differs from the later type of bipolar junction transistor invented in 1951 that operates as transistors still do, with the low-current input terminal as the base and the two high-current output terminals as the emitter and collector.
The point-contact transistor was commercialized and sold by Western Electric and others but was eventually superseded by the bipolar junction transistor, which was easier to manufacture and more rugged. The point-contact transistor did still remain in production until around 1966[citation needed], by which time the silicon planar transistor was dominating the market.


Forming[edit]
A model of the first commercially available point-contact transistor
While point-contact transistors usually worked fine when the metal contacts were simply placed close together on the germanium base crystal, it was desirable to obtain as high an α current gain as possible.
To obtain a higher α current gain in a point-contact transistor, a brief high-current pulse was used to modify the properties of the collector point of contact, a technique called 'electrical forming'. Usually this was done by charging a capacitor of a specified value to a specified voltage then discharging it between the collector and the base electrodes. Forming had a significant failure rate, so many commercial encapsulated transistors had to be discarded. While the effects of forming were understood empirically, the exact physics of the process could never be adequately studied and thus no clear theory was ever developed to explain it or provide guidance on improving it.
Unlike later semiconductor devices, it was possible for an amateur to make a point-contact transistor, starting with a germanium point-contact diode as a source of material (even a burnt-out diode could be used; and the transistor could be re-formed if damaged, several times if necessary).[3]

Characteristics[edit]
Some characteristics of point-contact transistors differ from the slightly later junction transistors:

The common base current gain (or α) of a point-contact transistor is usually around 2 to 3,[4] whereas α of bipolar junction transistor (BJT) cannot exceed 1. The common emitter current gain (or β) of a point-contact transistor does not usually exceed 1,[4] whereas β of a BJT is typically between 20 and 200.
Negative differential resistance. Point-contact transistors connected in the common emitter amplifier configuration will display negative output resistance, which may be undesirable for voltage/current amplifier applications. Switching circuits based around point-contact transistors often rely on negative differential resistance.[5]: 132, 149–163 
Until the development of the surface barrier transistor in 1953 point-contact transistors were the fastest transistors available,[5]: 71, 267 [6]: 227  some operating in the lower part of the VHF band when the fastest junction transistors could still only barely operate at a few MHz.
Moisture attack was less damaging to point-contact transistors than to junction transistors,[6]: 386  because their collector reverse resistance is lower and cutoff collector current higher.
When used in the saturated mode in digital logic, in some circuit designs (but not all) they latched in the "on" state,[citation needed] making it necessary to remove power for a short time in each machine cycle to return them to the off-state.
See also[edit]
Crystal radio
Duodiode
Transistron
References[edit]


^ Hoddeson, Lillian (1981). "The Discovery of the Point-Contact Transistor". Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences. 12 (1). University of California Press: 41–76. doi:10.2307/27757489. JSTOR 27757489.

^ Cressler, John (2017). Silicon Earth: Introduction to Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (2 ed.). CRC Press. p. 3-22. ISBN 9781351830201.

^ Home-Made Transistors: P B Helsdon, Wirless World, January 1954. Article starts "It is quite practicable to make point-contact transistors at home which compare quite well with those advertised by professional manufacturers."

^ a b The Bell System Technical Journal Volume XXXV Number 4, Copyright 1956 American Telephone and Telegraph Company p.770-771

^ a b Transistors: Theory and Applications Coblenz & Owens Copyright 1955 McGraw Hill p. 71, p.132, p.149-163 p. 267

^ a b Bell Telephone Labs Transistor Technology Volume 1 Bridgers, Staff & Shive Copyright 1958 Van Nostrand Company, Inc.


Further reading[edit]
Bardeen, J.; Brattain, W.H. (15 July 1948). "The Transistor, A Semiconductor Triode". Physical Review. 74 (2). American Physical Society: 230–231. Bibcode:1948PhRv...74..230B. doi:10.1103/physrev.74.230.
External links[edit]
The Point-contact Transistor
PBS article
vteElectronic componentsSemiconductordevicesMOS transistors
Transistor
NMOS
PMOS
BiCMOS
BioFET
Chemical field-effect transistor (ChemFET)
Complementary MOS (CMOS)
Depletion-load NMOS
Fin field-effect transistor (FinFET)
Floating-gate MOSFET (FGMOS)
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)
ISFET
LDMOS
MOS field-effect transistor (MOSFET)
Multi-gate field-effect transistor (MuGFET)
Power MOSFET
Thin-film transistor (TFT)
VMOS
UMOS
Other transistors
Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
Darlington transistor
Diffused junction transistor
Field-effect transistor (FET)
Junction Gate FET (JFET)
Organic FET (OFET)
Light-emitting transistor (LET)
Organic LET (OLET)
Pentode transistor
Point-contact transistor
Programmable unijunction transistor (PUT)
Static induction transistor (SIT)
Tetrode transistor
Unijunction transistor (UJT)
Diodes
Avalanche diode
Constant-current diode (CLD, CRD)
Gunn diode
Laser diode (LD)
Light-emitting diode (LED)
Organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
Photodiode
PIN diode
Schottky diode
Step recovery diode
Zener diode
Other devices
Printed electronics
Printed circuit board
DIAC
Heterostructure barrier varactor
Integrated circuit (IC)
Hybrid integrated circuit
Light emitting capacitor (LEC)
Memistor
Memristor
Memtransistor
Memory cell
Metal-oxide varistor (MOV)
Mixed-signal integrated circuit
MOS integrated circuit (MOS IC)
Organic semiconductor
Photodetector
Quantum circuit
RF CMOS
Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR)
Solaristor
Static induction thyristor (SITh)
Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC)
Thyristor
Trancitor
TRIAC
Varicap
Voltage regulators
Linear regulator
Low-dropout regulator
Switching regulator
Buck
Boost
Buck–boost
Split-pi
Ćuk
SEPIC
Charge pump
Switched capacitor
Vacuum tubes
Acorn tube
Audion
Beam tetrode
Barretter
Compactron
Diode
Fleming valve
Neutron tube
Nonode
Nuvistor
Pentagrid (Hexode, Heptode, Octode)
Pentode
Photomultiplier
Phototube
Tetrode
Triode
Vacuum tubes (RF)
Backward-wave oscillator (BWO)
Cavity magnetron
Crossed-field amplifier (CFA)
Gyrotron
Inductive output tube (IOT)
Klystron
Maser
Sutton tube
Traveling-wave tube (TWT)
X-ray tube
Cathode-ray tubes
Beam deflection tube
Charactron
Iconoscope
Magic eye tube
Monoscope
Selectron tube
Storage tube
Trochotron
Video camera tube
Williams tube
Gas-filled tubes
Cold cathode
Crossatron
Dekatron
Ignitron
Krytron
Mercury-arc valve
Neon lamp
Nixie tube
Thyratron
Trigatron
Voltage-regulator tube
Adjustable
Potentiometer
digital
Variable capacitor
Varicap
Passive
Connector
audio and video
electrical power
RF
Electrolytic detector
Ferrite
Antifuse
Fuse
resettable
eFUSE
Resistor
Switch
Thermistor
Transformer
Varistor
Wire
Wollaston wire
Reactive
Capacitor
types
Ceramic resonator
Crystal oscillator
Inductor
Parametron
Relay
reed relay
mercury relay





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Point-contact_transistor&oldid=1278095349"
Categories: Bipolar transistorsComputer-related introductions in 1947Transistor typesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2024






 This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 13:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Point-contact transistor




























11 languages


Add topic
















