https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ishango_bone




Ishango bone - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Archaeological discovery








1.2
Dating










2
Interpretations




Toggle Interpretations subsection





2.1
Mathematical








2.2
Astronomical








2.3
Other explanations










3
See also








4
References








5
Further reading


















Toggle the table of contents







Ishango bone



30 languages




العربيةAsturianuBikol CentralCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiEspañolEsperantoFrançaisGalego한국어Bahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתKiswahiliNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийTagalogதமிழ்TürkçeУкраїнськаWest-Vlams中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Paleolithic artifact from Congo
The Ishango bone on exhibition at the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences
The Ishango bone, discovered at the "Fisherman Settlement" of Ishango in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is a bone tool and possible mathematical device that dates to the Upper Paleolithic era.[1] The curved bone is dark brown in color, about 10 centimeters in length, and features a sharp piece of quartz affixed to one end, perhaps for engraving.[1] Because the bone has been narrowed, scraped, polished, and engraved to a certain extent, it is no longer possible to determine what animal the bone belonged to, although it is assumed to have been a mammal.[2]
The ordered engravings have led many to speculate the meaning behind these marks, including interpretations like mathematical significance or astrological relevance. It is thought by some to be a tally stick, as it features a series of what has been interpreted as tally marks carved in three columns running the length of the tool, though it has also been suggested that the scratches might have been to create a better grip on the handle or for some other non-mathematical reason. Others argue that the marks on the object are non-random and that it was likely a kind of counting tool and used to perform simple mathematical procedures.[3][4] Other speculations include the engravings on the bone serving as a lunar calendar. Dating to 20,000 years before present, it has been described as "the oldest mathematical tool of humankind",[1] though older engraved bones are also known, such as the approximately 26,000-year-old "Wolf Bone" from Dolni Vestonice in  the Czech Republic,[5][6] and the approximately 40,000-year-old Lebombo bone from southern Africa.


History[edit]
Archaeological discovery[edit]
The Ishango bone was found in 1950 by Belgian Jean de Heinzelin de Braucourt while exploring what was then the Belgian Congo.[7] It was discovered in the area of Ishango near the Semliki River. Lake Edward empties into the Semliki, which forms part of the headwaters of the Nile River (now on the border between modern-day Uganda and D.R. Congo). Some archaeologists believe the prior inhabitants of Ishango were a "pre-sapiens species". However, the most recent inhabitants, who gave the area its name, have no immediate connections with the primary settlement, which was "buried in a volcanic eruption".[8]
On an excavation, de Heinzelin discovered a bone about the "size of a pencil" amongst human remains and many stone tools in a small community that fished and gathered in this area of Africa.[8] Professor de Heinzelin brought the Ishango bone to Belgium, where it was stored in the treasure room of the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences in Brussels.[8] Several molds and copies were created from the petrified bone in order to preserve the delicate nature of the fragile artifact while being exported.[8] A written request to the museum was required to see the artifact, as it was no longer on display for the public eye.[8]

Dating[edit]
The artifact was first estimated to have originated between 9,000 BCE and 6,500 BCE, with numerous other analyses debating the bone to be as old as 44,000 years.[4] However, the dating of the site where it was discovered was re-evaluated, and it is now believed to be about 20,000 years old (dating from between 18,000 BCE and 20,000 BCE).[9][10] The dating of this bone is widely debated in the archaeological community, as the ratio of carbon isotopes was upset by nearby volcanic activity.[8]

Interpretations[edit]
First (sometimes called "center") column (invisible in picture), from bottom to top
Second (or "right") column (to the left in picture), from bottom to top
Third (or "left") column (to the right in picture), from bottom to top
Mathematical[edit]
The 168 etchings on the bone are ordered in three parallel columns along the length of the bone, each marking with a varying orientation and length.[1] The first column, or central column along the most curved side of the bone, is referred to as the M column, from the French word milieu (middle).[1] The left and right columns are respectively referred to as G and D, or gauche (left) and droite (right) in French.[1] The parallel markings have led to various tantalizing hypotheses, such as that the implement indicates an understanding of decimals or prime numbers. Though these propositions have been questioned, it is considered likely by many scholars that the tool was used for mathematical purposes, perhaps including simple mathematical procedures or to construct a numeral system.[4]
Discoverer of the Ishango bone, de Heinzelin, suggested that the bone was evidence of knowledge of simple arithmetic, or at least that the markings were "deliberately planned".[1][7] He based his interpretation on archaeological evidence, comparing "Ishango harpoon heads to those found in northern Sudan and ancient Egypt".[8] This comparison led to the suggestion of a link between arithmetic processes conducted at Ishango with the "commencement of mathematics in ancient Egypt."[8] The third column has been interpreted as a "table of prime numbers", as column G appears to illustrate prime numbers between 10 and 20,[1] but this may be a coincidence.[4] Historian of mathematics Peter S. Rudman argues that prime numbers were probably not understood until the early Greek period of about 500 BCE, and were dependent on the concept of division, which he dates to no earlier than 10,000 BCE.[11]
More recently, mathematicians Dirk Huylebrouck and Vladimir Pletser have proposed that the Ishango bone is a counting tool using the base 12 and sub-bases 3 and 4, and involving simple multiplication, somewhat comparable to a primitive slide rule. However, they have concluded that there is not sufficient evidence to confirm an understanding of prime numbers during this time period.[1][2][12]
Anthropologist Caleb Everett has also provided insight into interpretations of the bone, explaining that "the quantities evident in the groupings of marks are not random", and are likely evidence of prehistoric numerals. Everett suggests that the first column may reflect some "doubling pattern" and that the tool may have been used for counting and multiplication and also possibly as a "numeric reference table".[4]

Astronomical[edit]
Alexander Marshack, an archaeologist from Harvard University, speculated that the Ishango bone represents numeric notation of a six-month lunar calendar after conducting a "detailed microscopic examination" of the bone.[8][1][2][9] This idea arose from the fact that the markings on the first two rows adds up to 60, corresponding with two lunar months, and the sum of the number of carvings on the last row being 48, or a month and a half.[8] Marshack generated a diagram comparing the different sizes and phases of the Moon with the notches of the Ishango bone.[8] There is some circumstantial evidence to support this alternate hypothesis, being that present day African societies utilize bones, strings, and other devices as calendars.[1] However, critics in the field of archaeology have concluded that Marshack's interpretation is flawed, describing that his analysis of the Ishango bone confines itself to a simple search for a pattern, rather than an actual test of his hypothesis.[9]
This has also led Claudia Zaslavsky to suggest that the creator of the tool may have been a woman, tracking the lunar phase in relation to the menstrual cycle.[13][14]

Other explanations[edit]
Mathematician Olivier Keller warns against the urge to project modern culture's perception of numbers onto the Ishango bone.[2] Keller explains that this practice encourages observers to negate and possibly ignore alternative symbolic materials, those which are present in a range of media (on human remains, stones and cave art) from the Upper Paleolithic era and beyond which also deserve equitable investigation.[2] Dirk Huylebrouck, in a review of the research on the object, favors the idea that the Ishango bone had some advanced mathematical use, stating that "whatever the interpretation, the patterns surely show the bone was more than a simple tally stick."[1][8] He also remarks that "to credit the computational and astronomical reading simultaneously would be far-fetched", quoting mathematician George Joseph, who stated that "a single bone may well collapse under the heavy weight of conjectures piled onto it."[8] Similarly, George Joseph, in "The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics" also stated that the Ishango bone was "more than a simple tally." Moreover, he states that "certain underlying numerical patterns may be observed within each of the rows marked."[15] But, regarding various speculative theories of its exact mathematical use, concluded that several are plausible but uncertain.

See also[edit]
Lebombo bone
History of mathematics
Paleolithic tally sticks
References[edit]


^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Huylebrouck, Dirk (2019), "Missing Link", Africa and Mathematics, Mathematics, Culture, and the Arts, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 153–166, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-04037-6_9, ISBN 978-3-030-04036-9, S2CID 239306457, retrieved 2021-10-19

^ a b c d e Association pour la diffusion de l'information archéologique/Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Brussels (n.d.). "Have You Heard of Ishango?" (PDF). Natural Sciences.

^ Pletser, Vladimir (2012). "Does the Ishango Bone Indicate Knowledge of the Base 12? An Interpretation of a Prehistoric Discovery, the First Mathematical Tool of Humankind". arXiv:1204.1019 [math.HO].

^ a b c d e Everett, Caleb (2017). Numbers and the Making of Us: Counting and the Course of Human Cultures. Harvard University Press. pp. 35–36. ISBN 9780674504431.

^ *Graham Flegg, Numbers: their history and meaning, Courier Dover Publications, 2002 ISBN 978-0-486-42165-0, pp. 41–42.

^ Kapcar, Andrej (2011). "Tally sticks of the Stone Age".

^ a b de Heinzelin, Jean: "Ishango", Scientific American, 206:6 (June 1962) 105--116.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Stewart, Ian; Huylebrouck, D.; Horowitz, David; Kuo, K. H.; Kullman, David E. (1996-09-01). "The mathematical tourist". The Mathematical Intelligencer. 18 (4): 56–66. doi:10.1007/BF03026755. ISSN 0343-6993. S2CID 189884722.

^ a b c Davidson, I. (1993). The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man's First Art, Symbol and Notation. Alexander Marshack. American Anthropologist.

^ Brooks, A.S. and Smith, C.C. (1987): "Ishango revisited: new age determinations and cultural interpretations", The African Archaeological Review, 5 : 65-78.

^ Rudman, Peter Strom (2007). How Mathematics Happened: The First 50,000 Years. Prometheus Books. p. 64. ISBN 978-1-59102-477-4.

^ Huylebrouck, Dirk; Pletser, Vladimir (1999), "The Ishango Artefact: the Missing Base 12 Link", Forma: 339–34, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.543.7981

^ Zaslavsky, C. (1994). “Africa Counts” and Ethnomathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics, 14(2), 3–8. JSTOR 40248107

^ Claudia Zaslavsky, Women as the First Mathematicians, the Women in Mathematics Education Newsletter, Volume 7 Number 1, January 1992. https://web.nmsu.edu/~pscott/isgem71.htm

^ Joseph, George Gheverghese (2007). The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics (PDF). Princeton University Press. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-0-691-13526-7.


Further reading[edit]
O. Keller, "The fables of Ishango, or the irresistible temptation of mathematical fiction"
V. Pletser, D. Huylebrouck, "Contradictions and narrowness of views in "The fables of Ishango, or the irresistible temptation of mathematical fiction", answers and updates"
vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing(Paleolithic diet)
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
Schöningen
woomera
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Transverse
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest extant buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Jōmon
Linear
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Hill figure
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Prehistoric music
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Alligator drum
Paleolithic flute
Divje Babe flute
Gudi
Prehistoric religion
Evolutionary origin of religion
Paleolithic religion
Spiritual drug use
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court cairn
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ishango_bone&oldid=1286957868"
Categories: Archaeological discoveries in AfricaHistory of AfricaHistory of mathematicsMathematical toolsBone carvingsUpper Paleolithic1950 archaeological discoveriesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles containing French-language text






 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 02:26 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Ishango bone




























30 languages


Add topic
















