https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-English-based_programming_languages




Non-English-based programming languages - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Prevalence of English-based programming languages








2
International programming languages




Toggle International programming languages subsection





2.1
ALGOL 68








2.2
Citrine








2.3
Hedy








2.4
Scheme








2.5
Scratch










3
Based on non-English languages








4
Based on symbols instead of keywords








5
Modifiable parser syntax








6
References








7
Sources








8
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Non-English-based programming languages



8 languages




العربيةEsperantoहिन्दीItalianoNederlandsதமிழ்Тоҷикӣ中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)

This article may contain excessive or irrelevant examples. Please help improve the article by adding descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. (June 2020)
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: List inclusion criteria. Please help improve this article if you can. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Non-English-based programming languages are programming languages that do not use keywords taken from or inspired by English vocabulary.


Prevalence of English-based programming languages[edit]
Further information: English in computing
The use of the English language in the inspiration for the choice of elements, in particular for keywords in computer programming languages and code libraries, represents a significant trend in the history of language design. According to the HOPL online database of languages,[1] out of the 8,500+ programming languages recorded, roughly 2,400 of them were developed in the United States, 600 in the United Kingdom, 160 in Canada, and 75 in Australia.
Thus, over a third of all programming languages have been developed in countries where English is the primary language. This does not take into account the usage share of each programming language, situations where a language was developed in a non-English-speaking country but used English to appeal to an international audience (see the case of Python from the Netherlands, Ruby from Japan, and Lua from Brazil), and situations where it was based on another programming language which used English.

International programming languages[edit]
The concept of international-style programming languages was inspired by the work of British computer scientists Christopher Strachey, Peter Landin, and others. It represents a class of languages of which the line of the algorithmic languages ALGOL was exemplary.

ALGOL 68[edit]
ALGOL 68's standard document was published in numerous natural languages. The standard allowed the internationalization of the programming language. On December 20, 1968, the "Final Report" (MR 101) was adopted by the Working Group, then subsequently approved by the General Assembly of UNESCO's IFIP for publication. Translations of the standard were made for Russian, German, French, Bulgarian, and then later Japanese. The standard was also available in Braille[clarification needed]. ALGOL 68 went on to become the GOST/ГОСТ-27974-88 standard in the Soviet Union.

GOST 27974-88 Programming language ALGOL 68 – Язык программирования АЛГОЛ 68[2]
GOST 27975-88 Programming language ALGOL 68 extended – Язык программирования АЛГОЛ 68 расширенный[3]
In English, Algol68's case statement reads case ~ in ~ out ~ esac. In Russian, this reads выб ~ в ~ либо ~ быв.

Citrine[edit]
Localization is the core feature of the Citrine Programming Language. Citrine is designed to be translatable to every written human language. For instance the West Frisian language version is called Citrine/FY. Citrine features localized keywords, localized numbers and localized punctuation. Users can translate code files from one language into another using a string-based approach. At the time of writing, Citrine supports 111 human languages. Support is not limited to well-known languages; all natural human languages up to EGIDS-6 are being accepted for inclusion.

Hedy[edit]
Hedy is an open-source programming language which was developed for programming education. It was designed to be as instructive as possible and as accessible as possible with a few unique features. As of September 2024[update] it supports 47 different languages,[4] meaning its keywords can be typed in any of those. It supports languages that do not use the Latin alphabet for their keywords and variable names and it also supports more numbering systems than Arabic numerals, like Eastern Arabic numerals. All of these can be used interchangeably. The error messages are quite verbose, explaining what is wrong and what might be a fix.

Scheme[edit]
While internationalization is not a part of any Scheme standard, the expressiveness and flexibility of the language allows for the addition of internationalization as a library.  International Scheme is an open source project to which anyone can contribute a translation.  Since translations of Scheme can be loaded as libraries, Scheme programs can be multilingual.

Scratch[edit]
Scratch is a block-based educational language. The text of the blocks is translated into many languages, and users can select different translations. Unicode characters are supported in variable and list names. (Scratch lists are not stored inside variables the way arrays or lists are handled in most languages. Variables only store strings, numbers, and, with workarounds, Boolean values, while lists are a separate data type that store sequences of these values.) Projects can be "translated" by simply changing the language of the editor, although this does not translate the variable names.

Based on non-English languages[edit]

Programming languages based on human languages other than English


Basis

Name

Description

Link


Alsatian

Alsatran

A version of Fortran with keywords and built-in identifiers all translated to Alsatian.

[5]


Amharic

AxumLight / Geez#

Amharic-based programming language on the .NET platform

[1]


BunnaScript

A multilingual JavaScript and TypeScript programming language that enables writing computer code in the user's native language. Currently supports Amharic language.

[2]


Arabic

Al-Khawarizm

Middle-level language for system programming with custom IDE. Intended for professional purpose. Supports Windows and Linux platforms. First design and development in 2008. Development status: active.

[3]


Jeem

Arabic procedural programming language that uses features from both C and Pascal. Supports simple graphics. Intended for educational purposes. Developed by Mohammad Ammar Alsalka. Released in 2006.

[4]


ARLOGO

An open-source language based on the UCB Logo interpreter.




Ebda3

A multi-paradigm high-level programming language.




Qalb

A Scheme-like programming language.[6]

[5]


Kalimat

A programming language that aims to help Arab children learn about programming.[7]




Ammoria

Object-oriented language

[6]


Loughaty (MyProLang)

A general-purpose natural Arabic programming language based on a proprietary syntax.[8]




Phoenix

A C-like high-level imperative procedural language.

[7]


Seen

A Bilingual English/Arabic based language that transpiles to Rust.

[8]


Azerbaijani

Nasimi

An Azerbaijani implementation of Python.

[9]


Bengali

ChaScript

Built using ECMAScript grammar.[9]

[10]


Chinese

Chinese BASIC

Chinese-localized BASIC dialects based on Applesoft BASIC; for Taiwanese Apple II clones and the Multitech Microprofessor II.




ChinesePython [zh] (ZhPy)

A version of Python with keywords and built-in identifiers all translated to Chinese.

[11]


Easy Programming Language

A Chinese rapid application development language.




Wenyan

An esoteric language that closely follows the grammar and sentence structure of Classical Chinese; it compiles to JavaScript and Python (with C, etc. forthcoming).

wenyan-lang on GitHub [12]


Czech and Slovak

Karel

An educational programming language with Czech and Slovak versions.




Dutch

Superlogo

Created for computer-aided instruction, based on Logo.




Drama

An assembly language for educational purposes.




Finnish

sampo

An educational Forth-like programming language used in the 1980s by a high school in the city of Oulu.




Tampio

Made to look like a natural language. Object-oriented.

tampio on GitHub


French

GOTO++

An esoteric programming language loosely based on French and English.

[13]


Linotte






LSE (Language Symbolique d'Enseignement)

A pedagogical programming language designed in the 1970s at the École Supérieure d'Électricité. A kind of BASIC, but with procedures, functions, and local variables, like in Pascal.




BASICOIS

BASIC with French keywords[10]




SPIP

Templating language with French syntax[11]




WLangage

WinDev programming language




Rouille

Rust translated into French[12]

rouille on GitHub


German

Teuton

A German implementation of Python.

[14]


Schlange

Another German implementation of Python.

[15]


Robot Karol

A 3D implementation and German translation of Karel used for educational purposes in secondary education.




Greek

Glossa

Based on Pascal, used for educational purposes in secondary education.

[16]


M2000

Programming Environment using Greek and or English Keywords. Basic like language (interpreter) with over 500 Keywords, including OOP, Threads, Events, Lambda Functions.

List of BASIC dialects,
Environment on GitHub



Hausa

Hapy

Hausa Programming language that compiles to Python, for educational purposes.

Hapy Github page


Hebrew

TamliLogo

A Hebrew implementation of Logo.

[17]


Genesis

An esoteric programming language based on "Paleo-Hebrew".

[18]


Hindi

OM Lang

OM Lang is a multilingual, statically typed programming language that supports more than 9+ Indian languages. OM Lang is very similar to GO, C and Rust. It has its own interpreter and compiler.


OM Lang, OM Lang Android App[dead link]



Bharat programming language

A Hindi programming language with all the modern basic functionalities like loops, function, classes, structure. Its interpreter is written in Python. You can install in your local system or you can use online interpreter.


[19]



Kalaam.io

Kalaam is the programming language in Hindi and has all the basic functionalities of a modern programming language from for loops to while loops and from functions to conditional statements. Kalaam has its own parser, interpreter, Virtual memory stack and executes source code from parse tree generated by the parser.

[20]


Bhailang

Bhailang is dynamically typed toy programming language, based on an inside joke, written in Typescript.

[21]


Hindi Programming Language

A Hindi programming language for the .NET Framework.

[22]


W language

A Hindi translated HTML language

w language on GitHub


Hindi, Bengali, Gujarati

Hindawi Programming System

A set of variants of C, C++, lex, yacc, assembly, BASIC, and Logo




Icelandic

Fjölnir

An imperative programming language from the 1980s.




Indonesian

BAIK

C with Indonesian keywords.

BAIK on SourceForge


Irish

Setanta

High level general purpose language that runs in the browser. Contains a graphics API that can be used to make games and animations

[23]


Italian

CadregaLisp

A Lisp dialect based a comedian sketch of Aldo Giovanni and Giacomo

CadregaLisp on GitHub


GomorraSQL

A SQL dialect based upon the Italian series Gomorrah

GomorraSQL on GitHub


Monicelli

An esoteric programming language based upon the so-called "Supercazzola" of the movie My Friends

monicelli on GitHub


Japanese

Dolittle

Developed for educational purposes. Freeware.

[24]


Himawari [ja] (ひまわり)

Succeeded by Nadeshiko. Freeware.

[25]


Kotodama (ことだま) on Squeak

Based on Squeak. For educational purposes.

[26]


Mind [ja]

A variant of FORTH.[13] Commercial.

[27]


Nadeshiko [ja] (なでしこ)

Successor of Himawari. Open source freeware. Chosen (along with MIT Scratch) in one of the 3 official textbooks of technical arts for junior high schools in Japan, from 2022.[14][15]

[28]


Produire [ja]

An object-oriented Japanese programming language. Successor of TTSneo. Freeware.

[29]


TTSneo [ja]

A Japanese programming language. Succeeded by Produire. Freeware.

[30]


Unchiku (うんちく)

A Japanese programming language. Has limited functions/operations. Developed for educational purposes.

[31]


Javanese

sawa

A Javanese translated Python language.

sawa on GitHub


Korean

Ssiat

A language using Hangul (Korean). The name Ssiat (씨앗) means "seed" in Korean.




Aheui [ko]

An esoteric programming language similar to Befunge but using Hangul[16]




Changjo

A language using Hangul. It is used for multimedia and game programming.




hForth

A Forth system with an optional Korean keyword set.

[32]


Latin

Lusus






Lingua::Romana::Perligata

Alternative Syntax for Perl 5 that allows programming in Latin.

[33]


Latvian

Dzintars

Ruby translated into Latvian.

dzintars on GitHub


Lithuanian

Setonas

Python translated into Lithuanian.

setonas on GitHub


Malay

Malaybasic

BASIC with Malay keywords

[34]


Malayalam

Thengascript

A dialect of JavaScript in the Malayalam language.

[35]


Malluscript

An esoteric scripting language made with Rust based on Manglish with an aim to provide inclusivity and diversity in programming.

[36]


Nehiyawewin/Cree

Ancestral Code (Cree#)

An IDE and language based on the Nehiyaw (Cree) language and cultural storytelling practice.

[17]


Persian

Farsinet

An object-oriented programming language for .NET Framework. It is similar to C# and Delphi.

[37]


Kharazmi

A Persian programming language and IDE designed to teach programming to middle school students, similar to Pascal




Zangar

Zangar (Persian for Rust) allows you to write Rust programs in Persian, using Persian keywords and function names. It is adapted from Rouille, the original French implementation of Rust.

zangar on GitHub


Kati (زبان کاتی)

An online programming language in Persian language.

[38]


Hashemi (آقای هاشمی)

forked from "SimpleLanguage" that is a simple example language built using the Truffle API.

mr-hashemi on GitHub


Simorgh (SPL)

SPL has been invented with the aim that non-technical people would be able to produce their own portable applications which can be written in their own native language.

[39]


Polish

AC-Logo

Logo with Polish commands IDŹ, OTO, NAPRZÓD etc. created in 1992




SAKO

A language created in the 1950s and nicknamed the "Polish Fortran"




EOL

Expression-Oriented Language allowed for the use of both Polish and English keywords.




Zdzich

Amateur programming language for DOS.

[40]


Portuguese

VisuAlg

A language designed to teach programming, based on Pascal.

[41]


potigol

A functional programming language in Portuguese for beginners.

[42]


Portugol Studio

based in C and PHP for learning purposes.

[43]


G-Portugol

A programming language with Portuguese keywords.

gpt on GitHub


NPortugol

A .NET Programming language for embedded scripts

[44]


Russian

1C:Enterprise

A framework and language for business applications. English keywords can also be used.




РАПИРА

An interpreted procedural programming language with strong dynamic type system.




Аналитик

A language for symbolic manipulations with algebraic expressions used in the Soviet series of MIR computers.[18]




Эль-76

A language for symbolic manipulations with algebraic expressions used in the Soviet series of Elbrus computers.[19]




ЯМБ [ru]

ЯМБ (язык машин бухгалтерских) (machine language for accounting machines) – A Russian programming language for Iskra-554, Iskra-555, and Neva-501 specialized accounting computers.




КуМир [ru]

Similar to Pascal and IDE, mainly intended for educational usage in schools. The name is an acronym, which means Комплект ученический 'Мир' ('Mir' student's environment).




Робик

A simple language for teaching the basics of programming to children.




ЯАП

A language used on Nairi




АЛМИР-65

A language used on MIR




УАЯ [ru]

A language to study programming




ХУЯ

A language to study programming

[45]


Sanskrit

OM Lang

OM Lang is a statically typed, multilingual programming language with first-class support for Sanskrit. It claims to be the world's first Sanskrit programming language, offering Sanskrit keywords and syntax. The language aims to experiment with using Sanskrit in programming.

[46]


Serbian

Ћ плус плус

Ћ плус плус (Serbian, "C plus plus") is a JavaScript like programming language based on Cyrillic script

[47]


Sinhala

Ceylonicus

Ceylonicus, the first Sinhala-based programming language:
Ceylonicus is an open-source, interpreted, and functional programming language designed to bridge the gap between English and Sinhala syntax within a unified codebase. As a Sinhala Programming Language, it empowers developers to express their ideas in both languages seamlessly. Ceylonicus is implemented in Python, and features a web-based environment, built using Brython.


Run Online (WEB IDE), Source Code Ceylonicus Source Code on GitHub


Spanish

GarGar

A procedural programming language based on Pascal for learning purposes.[20]




Vainilla

A pseudocode interpreter for Spanish that runs in the browser.

[48]


PSeInt

A pseudocode interpreter for Spanish, like Pascal, with a completely Spanish-based syntax. PSeInt is an abbreviation for Pseudocode Interpreter.




Qriollo

An impure strict functional programming language that compiles to C, Python, and JVM Bytecode, with keywords in Rioplatense Spanish, spoken in Buenos Aires.

[49]


Latino [es]

A language with a completely Spanish-based syntax.

[50]


Sí

A direct translation pseudo-language for coding in C and C++ with Spanish keywords.

[51]


Pauscal [es]

A language with a completely Spanish-based syntax; compiler for 32-bit Windows.




InformATE [es]

A translation of Inform, used for creating text-based games.




EsJS

An interpreted programming language with Spanish syntax, based on JavaScript.

Website, Playground, Learn, esjs on GitHub


Swahili

swap

Swahili Programming Language; it is an educational programming language built over Nodejs, It was built as way to help Swahili speakers to easily grasp the concept of coding and programming in general.

[52][53]


Swedish

Enkelt

A language with a completely Swedish-based syntax. Transpiled to Python.

[54]


Tagalog

Bato

Ruby translated into Tagalog.

bato on GitHub


Tamil

Ezhil

Developed for educational purposes.




eTamil

The purpose of eTamil is to be an Indian DSL for Accounts & Fintech.

eTamil on GitHub


Swaram

A simple, general-purpose and procedural language.[21]


Agaram

A simple, Tamil programming language with interpreter and compiler.

Agaram-programming-language on GitHub


Niral

A Tamil programming language with Tamil & Latin script.[22]


Thendral

Thendral is a transpiler - Translates thendral ( a scripting language in tamil ) to valid javascript

thendral on GitHub


Maghilchi

It is a interpreted language with a natural language-like syntax with tamil words.[23]


W language

HTML translation in Tamil language

w language on GitHub


Turkish

Yakamoz

A Turkish implementation similar to that of Python.

[55]


Urdu

UrduScript

A dialect of JavaScript.

[56]


Welsh

Draig

A Welsh implementation of Raku

[24]


Yoruba

Yorlang

Built on top of Node.js.

[57]


Various

Logo

In one of its Apple II editions, it was available in French. A version used in Bulgarian education with Bulgarian Apple II clones was translated in Bulgarian. LOGO for the Commodore 64 had an Italian localization.




4th Dimension

On local versions, its internal language uses French or German keywords.




FOCAL

Keywords were originally in English, but DEC produced versions of FOCAL in several European languages.




Mama

An educational programming language and development environment, designed to help young students start programming by building 3D animations and games. It is currently available in English, Hebrew, Yiddish, and Chinese.




MS Word and MS Excel

Their macro languages used to be localized in non-English languages.




ML4

A language for client/server database programming, with keywords in English or German.[25]




RoboMind

An educational programming language available in Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Polish, Brazilian Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish, and Turkish.




Scratch

An introductory visual programming language from MIT's Media Lab with support for programming in multiple languages included as standard.




Catrobat

A visual programming language targeted at teenagers with support for more than 60 languages like Slovenian, Polish, Hindi, German, Romanian, Turkish, Norwegian, Akan, Twi, Hebrew, Chinese Simplified, Indonesian, Swedish, Chinese Traditional, Portuguese, Brazilian, Croatian, Bosnian, Thai, Japanese, Sindhi, Tamil, Swahili, Arabic, Persian, Korean, Serbian (Cyrillic), Serbian (Latin), Bengali, French, Slovak, Vietnamese, Italian, Macedonian, Russian, Portuguese, English, Canada, Czech, Sinhala, Azerbaijani, Kazakh, Dutch, Catalan, Albanian, Pashto, Gujarati, Finnish, Malay, Lithuanian, Malayalam, Danish, Hungarian, Afrikaans, Kannada, Greek, Bulgarian, Galician, Urdu (Pakistan), English, Australia, English, United Kingdom, Telugu, Ukrainian, Hausa and Igbo.

[58] on GitHub


TECO

The programming language used to drive the actions of the TECO text editor. The MIT dialect of this language was used to program early versions of Emacs before its 1985 rewrite in Emacs Lisp.




TI-Calculator BASIC

The 68000 version is localized. Various configuration strings are localized too, preventing direct binary compatibility.




Citrine

Programming language that can be used to code in any native human language, includes a translator module to translate code from one human language to another. At the time of writing it supports English, Dutch, Lithuanian and Romanian.





Based on symbols instead of keywords[edit]
APL – A language based on mathematical notation and abstractions.
Brainfuck – A minimalist esoteric programming language, created for the purpose of having the smallest possible compiler.[26]
Emojicode – An esoteric language based on Emojis.
G – Graphical language used in LabVIEW (not to be confused with G-code).
Hoon – A systems programming language for Urbit, compiling to Nock.
J – An APL-like language which uses only ASCII special characters and adds function-level programming.
Light Pattern – A language which uses a series of photographs rather than text as source code.[27]
Mouse – A minimalist language created by Peter Grogono which uses ASCII characters for keywords.
Piet – An art-based esoteric programming language.
Plankalkül – The first high-level non-von Neumann programming language, designed by Konrad Zuse during World War II in Germany.
Whitespace – An esoteric language based on whitespace characters (spaces, tabs, and line breaks).
Modifiable parser syntax[edit]
Babylscript – A multilingual version of JavaScript which uses multiple tokenizers to support localized keywords in different languages and which allows objects and functions to have different names in different languages.
Component Pascal – A preprocessor that translates native-language keywords into English in an educational version of the BlackBox Component Builder available as open source.[59] The translation is controlled via a modifiable vocabulary and supported by modifiable compiler error messages. A complete Russian version is used in education, and it should be possible to accommodate other left-to-right languages (e.g., the Kabardian language has been tried as a proof of concept).
HyperTalk – A programming language, which allows translation via custom resources, used in Apple's HyperCard.
IronPerunis – An IronPython 2.7 localization to Lithuanian and Russian.
AppleScript – A language which once allowed for different "dialects"[28] including French and Japanese; however, these were removed in later versions.
Maude – Completely user-definable syntax and semantics, within the bounds of the ASCII character set.[29]
Perl – While Perl's keywords and function names are generally in English, it allows modification of its parser to modify the input language, such as in Damian Conway's Lingua::Romana::Perligata module, which allows programs to be written in Latin or Michael G. Schwern's Lingua::tlhInganHol::yIghun Perl language in Klingon. They do not just change the keywords but also the grammar to match the language.
Ioke – Ioke is a folding language. It allows writing highly expressive code that writes code. Examples of same program in Chinese, Danish, Hindi and Spanish
References[edit]


^ In HOPL (History of Programming Languages), advanced search finds languages by country.

^ "GOST 27974-88 Programming language ALGOL 68 – Язык программирования АЛГОЛ 68" (PDF) (in Russian). GOST. 1988. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 24, 2017. Retrieved November 15, 2008.

^ 
"GOST 27975-88 Programming language ALGOL 68 extended – Язык программирования АЛГОЛ 68 расширенный" (PDF) (in Russian). GOST. 1988. Retrieved November 15, 2008.

^ "Hedy". Retrieved 2024-09-22.

^ Jacques Perrin, Conception entre science et art. Regards multiples sur la conception, Presses polytechniques et universitaires romandes

^ "Hello world: Meet قلب, a programming language based on Arabic script". 25 January 2013.

^ "Arabnet | Kalimat: First Arabic Programming Language for Kids".

^ IA eng (PDF).

^ ChaScript: Breaking the language barrier using Bengali programming system, IEEE, doi:10.1109/ICECE.2014.7026875, S2CID 39503002.

^ Labelle, Marcel, Les langages de programmation (PDF).

^ Spip documentation team, Language glossary.

^ Rouille language homepage, 6 June 2022.

^ Katagiri, Akira. 1 Mindのしくみと特徴 [Mind – its mechanism and features]. Scripts Lab (in Japanese). Retrieved 2021-07-31. (rough translation): Mind uses FORTH's mechanism. Even though FORTH was born in America, its grammar is similar to Japanese grammar.

^ Tarui, Hideto (2020-09-17). 日本語で書けちゃうプログラミング言語「なでしこ」が中学の教科書に採用！ [Japanese programming language "Nadeshiko" adopted in a junior high textbook!]. WINDOWS FOREST (IT news site) (in Japanese). Impress Corporation. Retrieved 2021-07-31.

^ 令和3年度中学校教科書 [2021 technical arts textbook for junior high school]. Kyoiku tosho corporate website (in Japanese). Archived from the original on 2021-06-25. Retrieved 2021-07-31.

^ "Aheui", Esolang (wiki).

^ Corbett, Jon (2023-07-20). "ᐊᒐᐦᑭᐯᐦᐃᑲᓇ ᒫᒥᑐᓀᔨᐦᐃᒋᑲᓂᐦᑳᓂᕽ | acahkipehikana mâmitoneyihicikanihkânihk | Programming with Cree# and Ancestral Code: Nehiyawewin Spirit Markings in an Artificial Brain". Digital Humanities Quarterly. 017 (2). ISSN 1938-4122.

^ Husberg, Nisse; Seppänen, Jouko (1974), "Analitik", ACM SIGSAM Bulletin, 8 (3), ACM: 24–25, doi:10.1145/1086837.1086841, S2CID 510819.

^ Эль-76, Кірыліца ў сеціве.

^ Manual del lenguaje GarGar [GarGar Manual] (in Spanish), archived from the original on November 5, 2016.[permanent dead link]

^ Ganesh (PDF), Infitt, 2003.

^ Niral (PDF), IJARCCE, 2024.

^ Maghilchi, Medium, 2022.

^ "Creating a new programming language - Draig". DEV Community. 2024-01-15. Retrieved 2024-12-02.

^ C/S Entwicklungsumgebung ML4, ML-Software.

^ "The Brainfuck Programming Language". Muppetlabs.com. Retrieved 2013-10-30.

^ Temkin (August 2015). "Light Pattern: Writing Code with Photographs". Leonardo. 48 (4): 375–381. doi:10.1162/LEON_a_01091. S2CID 57571969.

^ Cook, William R. (2007). "Apple Script". Proceedings of the third ACM SIGPLAN conference on History of programming languages. doi:10.1145/1238844.1238845. ISBN 9781595937667. S2CID 220938191 – via ResearchGate.

^ Language Design in Maude, by Matthias, 2006/06/05, LShift Ltd.


Sources[edit]
Pigott, Diarmuid (2006). "HOPL, the History of Programming Languages". Archived from the original on 2011-02-20. Retrieved 2008-04-14.
External links[edit]
SAKO information page at HOPL – By Diarmuid Pigott
vteProgramming paradigms (Comparison by language)ImperativeStructured
Jackson structures
Block-structured
Modular
Non-structured
Procedural
Programming in the large and in the small
Design by contract
Invariant-based
Nested function
Object-oriented(comparison, list)
Class-based, Prototype-based, Object-based
Agent
Immutable object
Persistent
Uniform function call syntax
DeclarativeFunctional(comparison)
Recursive
Anonymous function (Partial application)
Higher-order
Purely functional
Total
Strict
GADTs
Dependent types
Functional logic
Point-free style
Expression-oriented
Applicative, Concatenative
Function-level, Value-level
Dataflow
Flow-based
Reactive (Functional reactive)
Signals
Streams
Synchronous
Logic
Abductive logic
Answer set
Constraint (Constraint logic)
Inductive logic
Nondeterministic
Ontology
Probabilistic logic
Query
DSL
Algebraic modeling
Array
Automata-based (Action)
Command (Spacecraft)
Differentiable
End-user
Grammar-oriented
Interface description
Language-oriented
List comprehension
Low-code
Modeling
Natural language
Non-English-based
Page description
Pipes and filters
Probabilistic
Quantum
Scientific
Scripting
Set-theoretic
Simulation
Stack-based
System
Tactile
Templating
Transformation (Graph rewriting, Production, Pattern)
Visual
Concurrent,distributed,parallel
Actor-based
Automatic mutual exclusion
Choreographic programming
Concurrent logic (Concurrent constraint logic)
Concurrent OO
Macroprogramming
Multitier programming
Organic computing
Parallel programming models
Partitioned global address space
Process-oriented
Relativistic programming
Service-oriented
Structured concurrency
Metaprogramming
Attribute-oriented
Automatic (Inductive)
Dynamic
Extensible
Generic
Homoiconicity
Interactive
Macro (Hygienic)
Metalinguistic abstraction
Multi-stage
Program synthesis (Bayesian, Inferential, by demonstration, by example)
Reflective
Self-modifying code
Symbolic
Template
Separationof concerns
Aspects
Components
Data-driven
Data-oriented
Event-driven
Features
Literate
Roles
Subjects

vteTypes of programming languagesLevel
Machine
Assembly
Compiled
Interpreted
Low-level
High-level
Very high-level
Esoteric
Generation
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth

vteProgramming languages
Comparison
Timeline
History

Ada
ALGOL
Simula
APL
Assembly
BASIC
Visual Basic
classic
.NET
C
C++
C#
COBOL
Erlang
Elixir
Forth
Fortran
Go
Haskell
Java
JavaScript
Julia
Kotlin
Lisp
Lua
MATLAB
ML
Caml 
OCaml
Pascal
Object Pascal
Perl 
Raku
PHP
Prolog
Python
R
Ruby
Rust
SAS
SQL
Scratch
Shell
Smalltalk
Swift
more...

 Lists: Alphabetical
Categorical
Generational
Non-English-based
 Category





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-English-based_programming_languages&oldid=1281022004"
Categories: Non-English-based programming languagesLists of programming languagesNatural language and computingHidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja)CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2019Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with too many examples from June 2020All articles with too many examplesWikipedia articles with style issues from June 2020Articles needing cleanup from February 2015All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2015Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2015Articles with multiple maintenance issuesWikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2022Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2024All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with dead external links from August 2024Articles containing Japanese-language text






 This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 20:40 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Non-English-based programming languages




























8 languages


Add topic
















