https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template_talk:Basic_computer_components




Template talk:Basic computer components - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
What are output devices?


10 comments






2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Thunderbolt-compatible_devices


1 comment






3
Gamepad should be included in this navbox


1 comment






4
Scope, etc.


1 comment
















Toggle the table of contents







Template talk:Basic computer components



Add languages



						Page contents not supported in other languages.
					










TemplateTalk





English

















ReadEditAdd topicView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditAdd topicView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	























Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


This template does not require a rating on Wikipedia's content assessment scale.It is of interest to the following WikiProjects:Computing This template is within the scope of WikiProject Computing, a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of computers, computing, and information technology on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, please visit the project page, where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.ComputingWikipedia:WikiProject ComputingTemplate:WikiProject ComputingComputing

What are output devices?[edit]
I have deleted Headphones as an output device because headphones are not a basic computer component. A headphone jack is, though. Binksternet (talk) 19:42, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]

When I went through computer class, an output device was defined as something that interprets signals from the computer and converts them to signals a human can understand. A headphone jack is nothing more than a port/connective device. By that logic, 1) speakers wouldn't be considered output devices since they plug into the same jack, and 2) essentially all ports/jacks would be considered output devices and not the things that plug into them (like a monitor). Also, by extension, the mouse and keyboard wouldn't be input devices; either their plugs or the ports they plug into would be. See what I'm saying?--Ridge Runner (talk) 19:51, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
Also, here are two definitions of an output device.--Ridge Runner (talk) 19:56, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
This reference supports your assertion that a printer is a computer output device. A similar reference affirms this distinction about printers but does not have the word headphones at all in its section about "Computer output devices." The reason I'm using Google books for refs is that dictionary.reference.com is not very reliable.
What are "basic computer components? You have set up a difficult argument in that your "Basic computer components" pipes to Personal computer hardware, a completely different definition and an article that does not mention headphones... Are headphones "basic"? Are removable storage devices "basic"? Binksternet (talk) 20:12, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
I do concert and event sound for a living. I've connected my laptop's headphone jack to a huge concert sound system, and I've connected it to a live internet streaming broadcast. Is a concert sound system a computer output device? Is the internet a computer output device? At concerts and in the home, how about video projectors? LED walls at sports and concerts? Huget LED advertising screens on the side of the highway? Binksternet (talk) 20:19, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
Could you please explain why you think dictionary.com is unreliable? They cite all of their sources and get their definitions from reputable dictionaries. As for headphones, that's covered under speaker/loudspeaker - the only difference between headphones and regular speakers is one goes on your head.
If you would go back and look at the edit summaries, you would see why the title links to where it does. If you have a better title for this template, then please share it. Just to add, computer hardware would probably be a better title, but I didn't think of it until after I had already completed this template.
Yes, when connected to your computer, all of those things are output devices.--Ridge Runner (talk) 20:27, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
Maybe it would help if I clarified the reason I put basic in the title. I was attempting to make a basic list of things a computer will use. The reason I included headphones in this list is if you buy a cheap computer that doesn't come with speakers or you have a laptop, odds are pretty good that you'll use a pair of headphones. Does that help any?--Ridge Runner (talk) 20:46, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
To help you achieve your end, perhaps the word "common" could be used in place of "basic". Binksternet (talk) 21:34, 7 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
There is a distinction between devices and their hardware means of attachment to a computer; the hardware means typically called an adapter or controller.  Thus the HDD is a device but it was attached originally thru a controller and now is attached thru an Host Bus Adapter which is in the South Bridge.  Similarly, I think headphones and speakers are devices that are attached thru an audio adapter, also now, I think, in the South Bridge.  The headphone jack is not a device just as the SATA connector on the motherboard that connects to the HDD is not a device.   Perhaps the template should state "speakers and/or headphones."  I have no problem with the term basic, but I do think the template is more reflective of a Personal Computer than computers in general. Tom94022 (talk) 01:23, 9 November 2009 (UTC)[reply]
Why is Thunderbolt included in the Data Ports section? As of 2013-01, it hasn't been around for more than two years. Listing along USB, RS232 is wishful thinking regarding it's longevity at best, advertisement at worst.  Andorxor (talk) 01:32, 5 January 2013 (UTC)[reply]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Thunderbolt-compatible_devices[edit]
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Thunderbolt-compatible_devices — Preceding unsigned comment added by 46.10.229.1 (talk) 23:07, 30 April 2014 (UTC)[reply]

Gamepad should be included in this navbox[edit]
If Joystick is in the list of input devices, then Gamepad should be too, I think. —  Ark25  (talk) 07:26, 24 May 2014 (UTC)[reply]

Scope, etc.[edit]
Although this template is used in articles on older computers, it appears to be limited to modern personal computers. Also, BIOS is software; the hardware in which it resides, e.g., ROM, PROM, should be listed instead and perhaps a Preinstalled firmware line be added. Serial ports are used for fax modems and listing them is obsolete is questionable at best. Things missing include

Channels
IBM 6 bit channels for 70xx computers
IBM 8 bit channels for 70xx computers
Bus and Tag[1]
ESCON
FICON
Cabinets
Channels
CPU
Power supply
RAM
Racks
Same as cabinets
Core memory
joystick
Magnetic cards[a]
Magnetic drums
Magnetic stripe cards
Magnetic tape
punched cards
The template is inconsistent as to the endpoints that are considered part of the computer, e.g., diskpack is listed but speaker is not. Perhaps there should be a separate line for equipment that is not considered part of the computer but is attached to or mounted on it.
Older computers often had separate cabinets for, e.g., channels, cooling, CPU. power. There were a variety of mass storage media including magnetic cards[a] in a magazine and magnetic strips[b] in a magazine. -- Shmuel (Seymour J.) Metz Username:Chatul (talk) 14:36, 2 November 2022 (UTC) -- revised 15:07, 2 November 2022 (UTC)[reply]


Notes


^ a b E.g., on NCR CRAM

^ E.g., on an IBM 2321 Data Cell




References


^ Federal Information Processing Standards Publication: I/O channel interface. NBSFIPS. National Bureau of Standards. August 27, 1979. FIPSPUB 60-1. Retrieved November 2, 2022.







Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Template_talk:Basic_computer_components&oldid=1228212841"
Categories: Template-Class Computing pagesNA-importance Computing pagesAll Computing articles






 This page was last edited on 10 June 2024, at 01:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Template talk:Basic computer components




























Add topic















