https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-power_electronics




Low-power electronics - Wikipedia


























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History




Toggle History subsection





1.1
Watches








1.2
Mobile computing










2
Electronics




Toggle Electronics subsection





2.1
Computing elements








2.2
Reducing power loss








2.3
Wireless communication elements








2.4
Costs








2.5
Examples










3
See also








4
References








5
Further reading








6
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Low-power electronics



4 languages




فارسیFrançaisУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Electronic systems and components designed to consume as little electric power as possible


Low-power electronics are electronics designed to consume less electrical power than usual, often at some expense. For example, notebook processors usually consume less power than their desktop counterparts, at the expense of computer performance.[1]


History[edit]
Watches[edit]
Main article: watch
The earliest attempts to reduce the amount of power required by an electronic device were related to the development of the wristwatch. Electronic watches require electricity as a power source, and some mechanical movements and hybrid electromechanical movements also require electricity. Usually, the electricity is provided by a replaceable battery. The first use of electrical power in watches was as a substitute for the mainspring, to remove the need for winding. The first electrically powered watch, the Hamilton Electric 500, was released in 1957 by the Hamilton Watch Company of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
The first quartz wristwatches were manufactured in 1967, using analog hands to display the time.[2]
Watch batteries (strictly speaking cells, as a battery is composed of multiple cells) are specially designed for their purpose. They are very small and provide tiny amounts of power continuously for very long periods (several years or more). In some cases, replacing the battery requires a trip to a watch repair shop or watch dealer. Rechargeable batteries are used in some solar-powered watches.
The first digital electronic watch was a Pulsar LED prototype produced in 1970.[3] Digital LED watches were very expensive and out of reach to the common consumer until 1975, when Texas Instruments started to mass-produce LED watches inside a plastic case.
Most watches with LED displays required that the user press a button to see the time displayed for a few seconds because LEDs used so much power that they could not be kept operating continuously. Watches with LED displays were popular for a few years, but soon the LED displays were superseded by liquid crystal displays (LCDs), which used less battery power and were much more convenient in use, with the display always visible and no need to push a button before seeing the time. Only in darkness, you had to press a button to light the display with a tiny light bulb, later illuminating LEDs.[4]
Most electronic watches today use 32.768 KHz quartz oscillators.[2]
As of 2013, processors specifically designed for wristwatches are the lowest-power processors manufactured today—often 4-bit, 32.768 kHz processors.

Mobile computing[edit]
When personal computers were first developed, power consumption was not an issue. With the development of portable computers however, the requirement to run a computer off a battery pack necessitated the search for a compromise between computing power and power consumption. Originally most processors ran both the core and I/O circuits at 5 volts, as in the Intel 8088 used by the first Compaq Portable. It was later reduced to 3.5, 3.3, and 2.5 volts to lower power consumption. For example, the Pentium P5 core voltage decreased from 5V in 1993, to 2.5V in 1997.
With lower voltage comes lower overall power consumption, making a system less expensive to run on any existing battery technology and able to function for longer. This is crucially important for portable or mobile systems. The emphasis on battery operation has driven many of the advances in lowering processor voltage because this has a significant effect on battery life. The second major benefit is that with less voltage and therefore less power consumption, there will be less heat produced. Processors that run cooler can be packed into systems more tightly and will last longer. The third major benefit is that a processor running cooler on less power can be made to run faster. Lowering the voltage has been one of the key factors in allowing the clock rate of processors to go higher and higher.
[5]

Electronics[edit]
Computing elements[edit]
The density and speed of integrated-circuit computing elements has increased exponentially for several decades, following a trend described by Moore's Law. While it is generally accepted that this exponential improvement trend will end, it is unclear exactly how dense and fast integrated circuits will get by the time this point is reached. Working devices have been demonstrated which were fabricated with a MOSFET transistor channel length of 6.3 nanometres using conventional semiconductor materials, and devices have been built that use carbon nanotubes as MOSFET gates, giving a channel length of approximately one nanometre. The density and computing power of integrated circuits are limited primarily by power-dissipation concerns.
The overall power consumption of a new personal computer has been increasing at about 22% growth per year.[6]
This increase in consumption comes even though the energy consumed by a single CMOS logic gate in order to change its state has fallen exponentially in accordance with Moore's law, by virtue of shrinkage.[6]
An integrated-circuit chip contains many capacitive loads, formed both intentionally (as with gate-to-channel capacitance) and unintentionally (between conductors which are near each other but not electrically connected). Changing the state of the circuit causes a change in the voltage across these parasitic capacitances, which involves a change in the amount of stored energy. As the capacitive loads are charged and discharged through resistive devices, an amount of energy comparable to that stored in the capacitor is dissipated as heat:






E


s
t
o
r
e
d



=


1
2


C

U

2




{\displaystyle E_{\mathrm {stored} }={1 \over 2}CU^{2}}


The effect of heat dissipation on state change is to limit the amount of computation that may be performed within a given power budget. While device shrinkage can reduce some parasitic capacitances, the number of devices on an integrated circuit chip has increased more than enough to compensate for reduced capacitance in each individual device. Some circuits – dynamic logic, for example – require a minimum clock rate in order to function properly, wasting "dynamic power" even when they do not perform useful computations. Other circuits – most prominently, the RCA 1802, but also several later chips such as the WDC 65C02, the Intel 80C85, the Freescale 68HC11 and some other CMOS chips – use "fully static logic" that has no minimum clock rate, but can "stop the clock" and hold their state indefinitely. When the clock is stopped, such circuits use no dynamic power but they still have a small, static power consumption caused by leakage current.
As circuit dimensions shrink, subthreshold leakage current becomes more prominent. This leakage current results in power consumption, even when no switching is taking place (static power consumption). In modern chips, this current generally accounts for half the power consumed by the IC.

Reducing power loss[edit]
Loss from subthreshold leakage can be reduced by raising the threshold voltage and lowering the supply voltage. Both these changes slow down the circuit significantly. To address this issue, some modern low-power circuits use dual supply voltages to improve speed on critical paths of the circuit and lower power consumption on non-critical paths. Some circuits even use different transistors (with different threshold voltages) in different parts of the circuit, in an attempt to further reduce power consumption without significant performance loss.
Another method that is used to reduce power consumption is power gating:[7] the use of sleep transistors to disable entire blocks when not in use. Systems that are dormant for long periods of time and "wake up" to perform a periodic activity are often in an isolated location monitoring an activity. These systems are generally battery- or solar-powered and hence, reducing power consumption is a key design issue for these systems. By shutting down a functional but leaky block until it is used, leakage current can be reduced significantly. For some embedded systems that only function for short periods at a time, this can dramatically reduce power consumption.
Two other approaches also exist to lower the power overhead of state changes. One is to reduce the operating voltage of the circuit, as in a dual-voltage CPU, or to reduce the voltage change involved in a state change (making a state change only, changing node voltage by a fraction of the supply voltage—low voltage differential signaling, for example). This approach is limited by thermal noise within the circuit. There is a characteristic voltage (proportional to the device temperature and to the Boltzmann constant), which the state switching voltage must exceed in order for the circuit to be resistant to noise. This is typically on the order of 50–100 mV, for devices rated to 100 degrees Celsius external temperature (about 4 kT, where T is the device's internal temperature in Kelvins and k is the Boltzmann constant).
The second approach is to attempt to provide charge to the capacitive loads through paths that are not primarily resistive. This is the principle behind adiabatic circuits. The charge is supplied either from a variable-voltage inductive power supply or by other elements in a reversible-logic circuit. In both cases, the charge transfer must be primarily regulated by the non-resistive load. As a practical rule of thumb, this means the change rate of a signal must be slower than that dictated by the RC time constant of the circuit being driven. In other words, the price of reduced power consumption per unit computation is a reduced absolute speed of computation. In practice, although adiabatic circuits have been built, it has been difficult for them to reduce computation power substantially in practical circuits.
Finally, there are several techniques for reducing the number of state changes associated with a given computation. For clocked-logic circuits, the clock gating technique is used, to avoid changing the state of functional blocks that are not required for a given operation. As a more extreme alternative, the asynchronous logic approach implements circuits in such a way that a specific externally supplied clock is not required. While both of these techniques are used to different extents in integrated circuit design, the limit of practical applicability for each appears to have been reached.[citation needed]

Wireless communication elements[edit]
There are a variety of techniques for reducing the amount of battery power required for a desired wireless communication goodput.[8] 
Some wireless mesh networks use "smart" low power broadcasting techniques that reduce the battery power required to transmit. This can be achieved by using power aware protocols and joint power control systems.

Costs[edit]
In 2007, about 10% of the average IT budget was spent on energy, and energy costs for IT were expected to rise to 50% by 2010.[9]
The weight and cost of power supply and cooling systems generally depends on the maximum possible power that could be used at any one time.
There are two ways to prevent a system from being permanently damaged by excessive heat.
Most desktop computers design power and cooling systems around the worst-case CPU power dissipation at the maximum frequency, maximum workload, and worst-case environment.
To reduce weight and cost, many laptop computers choose to use a much lighter, lower-cost cooling system designed around a much lower Thermal Design Power, that is somewhat above expected maximum frequency, typical workload, and typical environment.
Typically such systems reduce (throttle) the clock rate when the CPU die temperature gets too hot, reducing the power dissipated to a level that the cooling system can handle.

Examples[edit]
Transmeta
Acorn RISC Machine (ARM)
AMULET microprocessor
Microchip nanoWatt XLP PIC microcontrollers
Texas Instruments MSP430 microcontrollers
Energy Micro/Silicon Labs EFM32 microcontrollers
STMicroelectronics STM32 microcontrollers
Atmel/Microchip SAM L microcontrollers
See also[edit]
Processor power dissipation
Common Power Format
Data organization for low power
IT energy management
Performance per watt
Power management
Green computing
Dynamic frequency scaling
Overclocking
Underclocking
Dynamic voltage scaling
Operand isolation
Glitch removal
Autonomous peripheral operation
References[edit]


^ "Intel Processor Letter Meanings [Simple Guide]". 2020-04-20.

^ a b 
Eric A. Vittoz.
"The Electronic Watch and Low-Power Circuits".
2008.

^ "All in Good Time: HILCO EC director donates prototype of world's first working digital watch to Smithsonian". Texas Co-op Power. Feb 2012. Retrieved 2012-07-21.

^ U.S. patent 4,096,550: W. Boller, M. Donati, J. Fingerle, P. Wild, Illuminating Arrangement for a Field-Effect Liquid-Crystal Display as well as Fabrication and Application of the Illuminating Arrangement, filed 15 October 1976.

^ Microprocessor Types and Specifications, by Scott Mueller and Mark Edward Soper, 2001

^ a b 
Paul DeMone.
"The Incredible Shrinking CPU: Peril of Proliferating Power".
2004.
[1]

^ 
K. Roy, et al.,
"Leakage current mechanisms and leakage reduction techniques in deep-submicrometer CMOS circuits", Proceedings of the IEEE,
2003.
[2]

^ 
"How to use optional wireless power-save protocols to dramatically reduce power consumption" by Bill McFarland 2008.

^ 
King, Rachael (2007-05-14). "Averting the IT Energy Crunch". Businessweek. Archived from the original on 2013-01-05. Energy costs, now about 10% of the average IT budget, could rise to 50% ... by 2010.


Further reading[edit]
Gaudet, Vincent C. (2014-04-01) [2013-09-25]. "Chapter 4.1. Low-Power Design Techniques for State-of-the-Art CMOS Technologies". In Steinbach, Bernd [in German] (ed.). Recent Progress in the Boolean Domain (1 ed.). Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. pp. 187–212. ISBN 978-1-4438-5638-6. Retrieved 2019-08-04. [3] (455 pages)
External links[edit]
"High-level design synthesis of a low power, VLIW processor for the IS-54 VSELP Speech Encoder" by Russell Henning and Chaitali Chakrabarti (NB. Implies that, in general, if the algorithm to run is known, hardware designed to specifically run that algorithm will use less power than general-purpose hardware running that algorithm at the same speed.)
CRISP: A Scalable VLIW Processor for Low Power Multimedia Systems by Francisco Barat 2005
A Loop Accelerator for Low Power Embedded VLIW Processors by Binu Mathew and Al Davis
Ultra-Low Power Design by Jack Ganssle
K. Roy and S. Prasad, Low-Power CMOS VLSI Circuit Design, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0-471-11488-X, 2000, 359 pages.
K-S. Yeo and K. Roy, Low-Voltage Low-Power VLSI Subsystems, McGraw-Hill 2004, ISBN 0-07-143786-X, 294 pages.
vteElectronicsBranches
Analogue electronics
Digital electronics
Electronic engineering
Instrumentation
Microelectronics
Optoelectronics
Power electronics
Printed electronics
Semiconductor
Schematic capture
Thermal management
Advancedtopics
2020s in computing
Atomtronics
Bioelectronics
List of emerging electronics
Failure of electronic components
Flexible electronics
Low-power electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectronics
Organic electronics
Photonics
Piezotronics
Quantum electronics
Spintronics
Electronicequipment
Air conditioner
Central heating
Clothes dryer
Computer/Notebook
Camera
Dishwasher
Freezer
Home robot
Home cinema
Home theater PC
Information technology
Cooker
Microwave oven
Mobile phone
Networking hardware
Portable media player
Radio
Refrigerator
Robotic vacuum cleaner
Tablet
Telephone
Television
Water heater
Video game console
Washing machine
Applications
Audio equipment
Automotive electronics
Avionics
Control system
Data acquisition
e-book
e-health
Electromagnetic warfare
Electronics industry
Embedded system
Home appliance
Home automation
Integrated circuit
Home appliance
Consumer electronics
Major appliance
Small appliance
Marine electronics
Microwave technology
Military electronics
Multimedia
Nuclear electronics
Open-source hardware
Radar and Radio navigation
Radio electronics
Terahertz technology
Wired and Wireless Communications





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Low-power_electronics&oldid=1254458549"
Categories: Electric powerElectronics and the environmentHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from August 2019All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2009CS1 interwiki-linked names






 This page was last edited on 31 October 2024, at 02:32 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Low-power electronics




























4 languages


Add topic
















