https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestic_robot




Domestic robot - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Indoor robots








3
Outdoor robots








4
Toys








5
Social robots








6
In popular culture








7
See also








8
References








9
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Domestic robot



11 languages




EspañolفارسیFrançais한국어Македонскиမြန်မာဘာသာNederlands日本語РусскийУкраїнськаTiếng Việt

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Type of service robot
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Domestic robot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (October 2024)A robot carrying drinks at the Ubiquitous Dream exhibition in Seoul, South Korea, in 2005
Part of a series onAutomation
Automation in general

Banking
Building
Home
Highway system
Laboratory
Library
Broadcast
Mix
Pool cleaner
Pop music
Reasoning
Semi-automation
Telephone
Attendant
Switchboard
Teller machine
Vehicular
Vending machine


Robotics and robots

Domestic
Vacuum cleaner
Roomba
Lawn mower
Guided vehicle
Industrial
Paint
ODD


Impact of automation

Manumation
OOL
Bias
Self-driving cars
Technological unemployment
Jobless recovery
Post-work society
Threat


Trade shows and awards

ASP-DAC
DAC
DATE
IEEE Robotics and Automation Award
ICCAD

vte
A domestic robot or homebot is a type of service robot, an autonomous robot that is primarily used for household chores, but may also be used for education, entertainment or therapy. While most domestic robots are simplistic, some are connected to Wi-Fi home networks or smart environments and are autonomous to a high degree. There were an estimated 16.3 million service robots in 2018.[1]


History[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2018)
People began to design robots for processing materials and construct products, especially during the Industrial Revolution in the period about 1760 to around 1840. This historical event marked a major turning point in history since people's living standard was greatly improved during that period. However, these robots cannot be considered as domestic robots. After the industrial robots were improved rapidly for over a hundred years since the Industrial Revolution, people started to consider the use of robots at home.[2]
One of the earliest domestic robots is called "HERO", which was sold during the 1980s. "Of all the educational and personal robots created during the 1980s the Heathkit HERO robots were by far the most successful and most popular."[3] There were four types of HERO robots created by Heathkit. The first model is called HERO 1. This model was used for educational purpose, and in order to fit the customer's demand, the second model, which was called HERO JR was generated for personal use. The last two generations are called HERO 2000 and the Arm Trainer. HERO 1, as an educational machine, had very good sensibility. It could gather information accurately and analyze this data. An improved generation of HERO 1 in educational purpose was HERO 2000 which "featured advanced programmability" and another generation, the Arm Trainer was for an industrial purpose and it was able to control the operation of full-scale industrial robots. However, the most important improvement of HERO 1 for the domestic robot is HERO JR. HERO JR was the first affordable, personal robot with a dynamic personality. People could use it to play songs, games, wake people up in the morning, notify important events, and even guard the home. As a private robot, people do not need program skills to operate the robot and if they want to re-program the robot, people can do it simply "with a home computer and optional RS-232 Accessory and BASIC Cartridge".[3]
Another prototype of the domestic robot was called "Topo", which was designed by Androbot Inc. and released in 1983. Its programming language allowed it to do geometric movements and perform tasks. However, it did not have a sensor so it could not receive the order and responded to the order correctly and thus it could not be considered as a real robot. To solve this problem, the second and third generation contained an infrared transmitter and could be controlled by a remote pad. For the last generation, Topo4 was featured by a text-to-speech processor. Although Topo4 was made, but it never went into production.
With these two prototypes of the domestic robot, the domestic robots became more and more accessible and affordable. By 2006 there were "3,540,000 service robots in use".[4]

Indoor robots[edit]
First generation Roomba vacuums the carpets in a domestic environment.
This type of domestic robot does chores around and inside homes. Different kinds include:

Robotic vacuum cleaners and floor-washing robots that clean floors with sweeping and wet mopping functions. Some use Swiffer or other disposable cleaning cloths to dry-sweep, or reusable microfiber cloths to wet-mop.
Within the ironing robots, Dressman is a mannequin to dry and iron shirts using hot air.[5] Other ones also includes mannequin for down parts (pants, trousers and skirts). More advanced ones (i.e. laundry-folding machines) fold and organizes the clothes, as Laundroid or FoldiMate (using image analysis and artificial intelligence), Effie (irons 12 items of clothing at once).
Cat litter robots are automatic self-cleaning litter boxes that filter clumps out into a built-in waste receptacle that can be lined with an ordinary plastic bag.
Robotic kitchens include Rotimatic (which makes rotis, tortillas,  puris out of flour in just a few minutes), Moley Robotics MK1 and Prometheus delta robot.[6]
Security robots such as Knightscope have a night-vision-capable wide-angle camera that detects movements and intruders. It can patrol places and shoot video of suspicious activities, too, and send alerts via email or text message; the stored history of past alerts and videos are accessible via the Web. The robot can also be configured to go into action at any time of the day.[7]
Atlas is a robot built to perform in house task such as sweeping, opening doors, climbing stairs, etc.[8] Samsung has been presenting robot butler designs such as Handy and Care.[9]

Outdoor robots[edit]
A robotic lawn mower
A robotic lawn mower is a lawn mower that is able to mow a lawn by itself after being programmed. Once programmed, this invention repeats the operation by itself according to its programming. Robotic lawn mowers come with a power unit which may be an electric motor or internal combustion engine. This provides power to the robot and allows it to move itself and its cutting blades. There is also a control unit which helps the mower move. This unit also contains a memory unit which records and memorizes its operation programming. Its memorized route includes the length of travel in a given direction and turns angles. This allows the same lawn to be mowed repeatedly without having to reprogram. The steering unit acquires an operation signal and propels the lead wheel, which leads the mower, go guide along the programmed route.
Some models can mow complicated and uneven lawns that are up to three-quarters of an acre in size. Others can mow a lawn as large as 40,000 square feet (3,700 m2), can handle a hill inclined up to 27 degrees.[7]
There are also automated pool cleaners that clean and maintain swimming pools autonomously by scrubbing in-ground pools from the floor to the waterline in 3 hours, cleaning and circulating more than 70 US gallons (260 L) of water per minute, and removing debris as small as 2 μm in size.[7]
Gutter-cleaning robots such as Looj use brushes and rubber blades to remove debris from rain gutters; users operate the device using a remote.[10]
Window cleaning robots are most commonly used to clean outdoor windows, more specifically house windows. However, it may be used on other types of windows, such as ones on tall buildings and structures. This robot contains a movement system which allows the robot to navigate itself across the window surface in a defined direction. It also has a powered agitator located by the cleaning pad. When activated, the agitator gets rid of debris and dirt from the window surface. The cleaning pad directly interacts with the window surface and is directly responsible for removing the dirt by filling itself with specialized window cleaning fluid.
A window-washing robot commonly uses two magnetic modules to navigate windows as it sprays the cleaning solution onto microfiber pads to wash them. It covers about 1,601 square feet (148.7 m2) per charge.[11]

Toys[edit]
Main articles: Personal robot, Smart toy, and Robotic pet
See also: Category:Toy robots
Robotic toys, such as the well-known Furby, have been popular since 1998. There are also small humanoid remote-controlled robots as well as electronic pets, such as robotic dogs. They have also been used by many universities in competitions such as the RoboCup.

Social robots[edit]
Main articles: Personal robot and Social robot
Social robots take on the function of social communication. Domestic humanoid robots are used by elderly and immobilized residents to keep them company.
Home-telepresence robots can move around in a remote location and let one communicate with people there via its camera, speaker, and microphone.
Network robots link ubiquitous networks with robots, contributing to the creation of new lifestyles and solutions to address a variety of social problems including the aging of population and nursing care.[12]
Robots built for therapy have been in production for quite some time now. Some of these uses can be for autism or physical therapy.

In popular culture[edit]
In the Star Wars film series, robots of all shapes and sizes can be found assisting humans with several tasks. C-3PO is a robot designed to assist humans in translation, and etiquette.[13]
Isaac Asimov's I, Robot and the  2004 film of the same name, featured domestic robots as a common feature, in daily routines and family lives.
Many cartoons feature robot maids, notably Rosie the Robot from The Jetsons. Maid Robots are especially prominent in anime (in Japanese, they are called Meido Robo, Meido Roboto, or meido robot), and their artificial intelligence ranges from rudimentary to fully sentient and emotional, while their appearance ranges from obviously mechanical to human-like.
The 2009 adaptation of Astro Boy, based on creator Osamu Tezuka's Japanese anime Tetsuwan Atomu, showcases robots with various domestic functions. Orrin, with resemblance to the comedic, gold, humanoid companion C-3PO, plays Dr. Tenma's domestic robot performing various tasks such as housekeeping and tutoring to Dr. Tenma's son, Toby.[14]
A vignette, shown at the end of the final episode of Syfy's failed 2010 Battlestar Galactica prequel TV series Caprica, features early models of Cylons serving as domestic and industrial robotic assistants for the human inhabitants of the Twelve Colonies of Kobol, some five years before the revolt that precipitated the First Cylon War.
In the 2008 film Wall-E, humans use sentient robots as trash compactors to clean up the mess they left behind on Earth. Wall-E is a small bulldozer-like robot who has claws for hands and spends all his time collecting and compressing garbage into cubes. Another robot named Eve is small, sleek, and can fly.[15]
In the 2012 movie Robot & Frank featured a domestic robot, the story of the movie centered on an elderly man and his relationship with a caretaker robot.
In the 2022 French movie, Bigbug, set in 2045, where communities have robotic helpers, a group of suburbanites are locked in for their own protection by their household robots, while a rogue, sentient AI android revolt uprising outside.
The 2024 TV series Sunny involves an American woman living in Kyoto whose husband and son vanished in a plane crash, receives a domestic robot from her husband's robotics company.
See also[edit]

Adaptable robotics
Android (robot)
Artificial intelligence
Disability robot
Dustbot
Floor plans
Fog computing
Furby
Gerontotechnology
Google Home
Home automation
Home automation for the elderly and disabled
House navigation system
Humanoid robot
Internet of things
List of home automation topics
Mobile robot
Open hardware
Personal robot
Poo-Chi
RoboSapien
Robot kit
Robotic arm
Robotic mapping
Robotics suite
Service robot
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
Soft robotics
Matter

References[edit]


^ "Executive Summary" (PDF). International Federation of Robotics. 2019. Retrieved 2020-02-11.

^ "25 Great Moments In Robotics History". Forbes. August 17, 2006. Retrieved 2019-04-15.

^ a b "HERO Robots".

^ "Home is Where the Robot is: Vacuum Cleaners, Security Guards, and Old-Age Companions". The New Atlantis (1): 136–138. 2003. JSTOR 43152865.

^ "Twelve robots that have invaded American homes". Boston.com. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. the German conglomerate Siemens introduced a robot designed to iron shirts using hot air.

^ Robotic Kitchen - High Tech Cooking Robot Chef

^ a b c DesMarais, Christina (2013-04-16). "Domestic Robots: High-Tech House Helpers". PCWorld. Retrieved 2013-03-28.

^ Reynolds, Emily (2016-02-22). "The household robots who will do your chores". Wired UK.

^ Tibken, Shara (2021-01-11). "Samsung's Bot Handy is kind of like a first generation robot butler". CNET. Retrieved 2021-04-17.

^ "Twelve robots that have invaded American homes". Boston.com. Archived from the original on 17 January 2015. The Looj, also by iRobot, addresses one of the most tedious aspects of owning a house: cleaning its gutters. Users operate the device using a remote.

^ Aamoth, Doug (August 16, 2013). "Winbot Window-Washing Robot: Like Roomba, but for Glass Windows". Time.

^ Network Robot Forum Archived October 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine

^ Salmon, Paul (December 2017). "What the Robots of Star Wars tell us about Automation". Phys.org.[permanent dead link]

^ "Tetsuwan Atomu [Mighty Atom] - The Japanese Collections at the Library of Congress: Past, Present, and Future (September 20–October 16, 2010)". www.loc.gov. Retrieved 2018-09-05.

^ Ebert, Roger (June 26, 2008). "Droid story (Wall-E movie review)". Rogerebert.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Domestic robots.




Wikiversity has learning resources about Open-source domestic robots

Schumacher, Helene (30 July 2018). "Is this the end of household chores?". BBC Future.
vteHome appliancesTypes
Air conditioner
Air fryer
Air ioniser
Air purifier
Barbecue grill
Blender
Immersion blender
Bread machine
Bug zapper
Coffee percolator
Clothes dryer
combo
Clothes iron
Coffeemaker
Dehumidifier
Dishwasher
drying cabinet
Domestic robot
Deep fryer
Electric blanket
Electric drill
Electric kettle
Electric knife
Electric water boiler
Electric heater
Electric shaver
Electric toothbrush
Epilator
Espresso machine
Evaporative cooler
Food processor
Fan
attic
bladeless
ceiling
Fan heater
window
Freezer
Garbage disposer
Hair dryer
Hair iron
Humidifier
Icemaker
Ice cream maker
Induction cooker
Instant hot water dispenser
Juicer
Kitchen hood
Kitchen stove
Laundry-folding machine
Lawn mower
Riding mower
Robotic lawn mower
Leaf blower
Lighter
Mixer
Oven
Convection oven
Microwave oven
Pie iron
Pressure cooker
Refrigerator
Crisper drawer
smart
Rice cooker
Sewing machine
Slow cooker
Television set
Toaster
Vacuum cleaner
central
manual
robotic
Waffle iron
Water dispenser
Washing machine
Washer-dryer
See also
Appliance plug
Appliance recycling

vteMobile robots and uncrewed vehiclesAerial
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
Unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV)
Aerobot
Helicam
List of unmanned aerial vehicle applications
Ornithopter
GroundWalking
Humanoid
Android
Hexapod
list
Other
Unmanned ground vehicle (UGV)
Automated guided vehicle (AGV)
Self-driving car
Automatic train operation (ATO)
list
Underwater
Unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV)
Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV)
Intervention AUV (I-AUV)
Remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROUV)
Underwater glider
Surface
Unmanned surface vehicle (USV)
Space
Uncrewed spacecraft
list of probes
list by program
list of orbiters
Cargo spacecraft
spaceflights to the ISS
Space telescope
list
Other
Domestic
Military
Rescue
Medical
Disability
Agricultural
BEAM robotics
Microbotics
Nanorobotics
Robotics
Robot locomotion
Autonomous robot
Autonomous logistics
Radio-controlled model
Remote control vehicle
Remote control animal

Categories
Radio control
Unmanned vehicles

vteRoboticsMain articles
Outline
Glossary
Index
History
Geography
Hall of Fame
Ethics
Laws
Competitions
AI competitions
Types
Aerobot
Anthropomorphic
Humanoid
Android
Cyborg
Gynoid
Claytronics
Companion
Automaton
Animatronic
Audio-Animatronics
Industrial
Articulated
arm
Domestic
Educational
Entertainment
Juggling
Military
Medical
Service
Disability
Agricultural
Food service
Retail
BEAM robotics
Soft robotics
Classifications
Biorobotics
Cloud robotics
Continuum robot
Unmanned vehicle
aerial
ground
Mobile robot
Microbotics
Nanorobotics
Necrobotics
Robotic spacecraft
Space probe
Swarm
Telerobotics
Underwater
remotely-operated
Robotic fish
Locomotion
Tracks
Walking
Hexapod
Climbing
Electric unicycle
Robotic fins
Navigation and mapping
Motion planning
Simultaneous localization and mapping
Visual odometry
Vision-guided robot systems
Research
Evolutionary
Kits
Simulator
Suite
Open-source
Software
Adaptable
Developmental
Human–robot interaction
Paradigms
Perceptual
Situated
Ubiquitous
Companies
ABB
Amazon Robotics
Anybots
Barrett Technology
Boston Dynamics
Doosan Robotics
Energid Technologies
FarmWise
FANUC
Figure AI
Foster-Miller
Harvest Automation
HD Hyundai Robotics
Honeybee Robotics
Intuitive Surgical
IRobot
KUKA
Rainbow Robotics
Starship Technologies
Symbotic
Universal Robotics
Wolf Robotics
Yaskawa
Related
Critique of work
Powered exoskeleton
Workplace robotics safety
Robotic tech vest
Technological unemployment
Terrainability
Fictional robots

 Category
 Outline

vteElectronicsBranches
Analogue electronics
Digital electronics
Electronic engineering
Instrumentation
Microelectronics
Optoelectronics
Power electronics
Printed electronics
Semiconductor
Schematic capture
Thermal management
Advancedtopics
2020s in computing
Atomtronics
Bioelectronics
List of emerging electronics
Failure of electronic components
Flexible electronics
Low-power electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectronics
Organic electronics
Photonics
Piezotronics
Quantum electronics
Spintronics
Electronicequipment
Air conditioner
Central heating
Clothes dryer
Computer/Notebook
Camera
Dishwasher
Freezer
Home robot
Home cinema
Home theater PC
Information technology
Cooker
Microwave oven
Mobile phone
Networking hardware
Portable media player
Radio
Refrigerator
Robotic vacuum cleaner
Tablet
Telephone
Television
Water heater
Video game console
Washing machine
Applications
Audio equipment
Automotive electronics
Avionics
Control system
Data acquisition
e-book
e-health
Electromagnetic warfare
Electronics industry
Embedded system
Home appliance
Home automation
Integrated circuit
Home appliance
Consumer electronics
Major appliance
Small appliance
Marine electronics
Microwave technology
Military electronics
Multimedia
Nuclear electronics
Open-source hardware
Radar and Radio navigation
Radio electronics
Terahertz technology
Wired and Wireless Communications

Authority control databases: National Germany




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Domestic_robot&oldid=1286956511"
Categories: Domestic robotsBioroboticsHome appliancesHome automation20th-century inventionsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2022Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from May 2008All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2024All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles to be expanded from November 2018All articles to be expandedCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 02:13 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Domestic robot




























11 languages


Add topic
















