https://www.bbc.com/editorialguidelines





































The BBC’s Editorial Values and Standards




















          Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































           Editorial Guidelines 
          
        







Menu







Menu











                Home
              



                Guidelines
              



                Guidance
              



                Forms
              



                Commercial Services
              



                Contact
              



                Ofcom
              



                Search
              









JavaScript has been disabled.

				This page needs JavaScript to work correctly. Please enable JavaScript in your browser
				settings.

				JavaScript is required for the following feature(s):

opening and closing the navbar (on mobile)




















The BBC’s Editorial Values and Standards

























Browse the Guidelines

The Editorial Guidelines are the BBC's editorial values and standards. They apply to all our content, wherever and however it is received.


















Browse the Guidance

Guidance notes supplement the Editorial Guidelines, with further explanation of their themes and practical tips.








Updates

View all updates
                    



















Scottish Parliamentary by-election - Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse 

A by-election for the Scottish Parliament is being held in the constituency of Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse on June 5th. Click here for further information. 

















Westminster by-election in Runcorn and Helsby

A parliamentary by-election is being held on May 1st in Runcorn and Helsby.  Click here for further information.

















Election Guidelines 2025

The formal election period for local government elections in England started at 00.01 on Tuesday 25th March.   

















Updated:  Removal of BBC Online Content Guidance

Removal of BBC Online Content

















Reporting IS

 Editorial Policy advice when reporting IS.

















New Guidance: The use of Artificial Intelligence

New guidance and advice on the use of Artificial Intelligence

















Updated: Social Media Guidance

Personal Use of Social Media

















How to set up an Action Line

Advice on setting up an action line to accompany your programme/report/article.















iPages Dev tools

Page built: Tue Apr 15 2025 16:22:43 BST
Site ID: ipages-editorial-guidelines
Built from: master @ 1158ea8











Rebuild Page
The page will automatically reload. You may need to reload again if the build takes longer than expected.
            


                    Rebuild page
                    




Useful links


                    View in iSite
                    




                    View page XML
                    




                    View JSON cache
                    




                    View in iPages Dashboard
                    




Demo mode
Hides preview environment warning banner on preview pages.



On

Off


Theme toggler
Select a theme and theme mode and click "Load theme" to load in your theme combination.


Theme:


Blue



Green



Internal



Pink



Purple



Red



Studios



Teal



Wales



Neutral



Theme Mode:


Dark



Default



Light



Load theme
Reset







     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                  


