https://www.bbc.com/programmes/p09k7ctp/episodes/player




BBC Radio 5 Live - Sport's Strangest Crimes - Available now



















































 





  



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    





BBC Radio 5 Live

Sport's Strangest Crimes

 HomeEpisodesClipsPodcast 

Main content

Sport's Strangest Crimes Episodes Available now





All




Available now
(89)




Next on
(2)


















7. Redemption and Beyond—Bloodgate

Harlequins and Williams chase Premiership glory, plus what's the legacy of Bloodgate?

















6. Rugby’s Reckoning—Bloodgate

As Richards alleges blood cheating is rife, Williams has a difficult return to rugby.

















5. The Biggest Beast in The Jungle—Bloodgate

Bloodgate is big news - and it’s about to get even bigger…

















4. Downfall—Bloodgate

Tom faces pressure from the club and his team-mates as he considers blowing the whistle.

















3. The Cover-ups—Bloodgate

Williams doubles down on his deceit and Quins agree a cover story but both face charges.

















2. It’s Not Real Blood—Bloodgate

The story of one rugby's most notorious matches, told by those who were there.

















1. Dandies to Dark Arts—Bloodgate

Ross Kemp visits the Bloodgate joke shop and traces how Harlequins lost their morals.

















Introducing…Bloodgate—Bloodgate

How a joke shop blood capsule unleashed a chain of events that shook rugby to its core.

















8: Sting in the Tale—Confessions of a Match Fixer

On the other side of the world, a bugged goalpost brings tales of the match-fixing king.

















7: Dragged Back in—Confessions of a Match Fixer

Voices from the past bring new opportunities. But is Moses in or is he out?





Previous

1

2

3

4

5

…

9


Next







Related Content


Similar programmes
By genre:
Factual > Crime & Justice > True CrimeSport

By format:

Podcasts




 




Schedule








 


     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                   



