https://www.bbc.com/programmes/p0l6qmb9




BBC Radio 5 Live - Rugby Union Weekly, Women’s Six Nations: England win the Grand Slam



















































 





  



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    





BBC Radio 5 Live

Rugby Union Weekly

 HomeEpisodesClipsPodcast 

Main content











Listen now







Women’s Six Nations: England win the Grand Slam


Rugby Union Weekly






 


England held off a late France fightback to secure a fourth consecutive Grand Slam and a seventh straight title.

Show more



England held off a late France fightback to secure a fourth consecutive Grand Slam and a seventh straight title. Sara Orchard is joined by Kat Merchant, Katy Daley-McLean and Claire Thomas to dissect how England nearly let the title slip away. 
The team chat England’s performance with questions around selection and how this England team would fair at the World Cup which is fast approaching. James Burridge catches up with scrum-half Natasha Hunt and how she is feeling after that narrow victory at Twickenham. 
There are also questions around the other end of the Six Nations table with Wales and Italy playing Sunday for the wooden spoon.

Show less










                        Download                    






 Choose your file
                        




                                    Higher quality (128kbps)
                                



                                    Lower quality (64kbps)
                                










Release date: 
26 April 2025


                                    Available now
                            

28 minutes
            







 
More episodes




            See all episodes from Rugby Union Weekly
        














Featured








.













BBC Sport - Rugby Union




The home of Rugby Union on BBC Sport online.





Rugby Union Weekly live!




An historic moment for Rugby Union Weekly: Our first ever live show!






Podcast











Rugby Union Weekly

Breaking down rugby's biggest stories with special guests and expert analysis.














Related Content


Similar programmes
By genre:
Sport > Rugby Union

By format:

Podcasts




 




Schedule








 


     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                   




