https://www.bbc.com/programmes/p04q5p2n




BBC Radio 5 Live - Rugby Union Weekly



















































 



 



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help       BBC Account        Notifications         Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live               More menu           Search BBC              Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food        Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live         Close menu    





BBC Radio 5 Live

Rugby Union Weekly

 HomeEpisodesClipsPodcast 

Main content








Rugby Union Weekly




Ugo Monye, Chris Jones, Danny Care and Chris Ashton bring you special guests and cover the biggest stories in rugby union.

Show more



Ugo Monye, Chris Jones, Danny Care and Chris Ashton bring you special guests and cover the biggest stories in rugby union.
We'd love to hear from you on the pod; email rugbyunionweekly@bbc.co.uk or search for 5 Live Sport on social media to send us a message.

Show less











 
Available now







Women’s Six Nations: England win the Grand Slam











Duration: 
28:13








All available episodes

                    (171 total)
                












Supporting Content




2025 Men's Six Nations review: Watch now!
Watch our full podcast reviewing the 2025 Six Nations on the BBC Sounds YouTube channel. 














BBC Sport - Rugby Union
The home of Rugby Union on BBC Sport online. 







Ilona Maher on joining Bristol Bears, TikTok and the Olympics
Watch our full podcast special with the USA superstar on the BBC Sounds YouTube channel. 














Rugby Union Weekly live!
An historic moment for Rugby Union Weekly: Our first ever live show! 










"Good results but sticky performances." Abbie Ward on Six Nations so far




England lock Abbie Ward looks ahead to the Red Roses' Six Nations match against Scotland.









Duration: 
1:24













Danny Care: "Leinster are better than Ireland!"




After a statement over Harlequins, are Leinster the team to beat in the Champions Cup?









Duration: 
1:48













Wales v England: Dawson and Owens on 'breathtaking' England




Matt Dawson and Ken Owens react to a record Six Nations win for England over woeful Wales









Duration: 
1:40













Scotland's Russell on facing France and 'brilliant' Ntamack




Scotland co-captain Finn Russell discusses their upcoming game against France in Paris.









Duration: 
2:19










See all clips









Related Content



Similar programmes
By genre:
Sport > Rugby Union

By format:

Podcasts














Schedule









 


     Explore the BBC      Home            News            Sport            Weather            iPlayer            Sounds            Bitesize     CBeebies     CBBC     Food         Home     News     Sport     Business     Innovation     Culture     Travel     Earth     Video     Live              Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                   



