https://www.bbc.com/programmes/w3ct7z03




BBC World Service - Not by the Playbook, Crossing the line















































 





  



           Homepage     Accessibility links   Skip to content   Accessibility Help                       Close menu    





BBC World Service

Not by the Playbook

 HomeEpisodesClipsPodcastSubscribe to our Newsletter 

Main content











Listen now







Crossing the line


Not by the Playbook






 


What's the hardest part of any task? Finding the motivation to do it? The effort and energy you have to expend doing it. Or is it that last part, crossing the line?

Show more



This week’s Not by the Playbook is “crossing the line”.
Aneta Grabmuller is both a winter and summer triathlete. She first started competing at the age of 15, but within a few years she had retired having fallen out of love with the sport. She had been subjected to behaviour from her coach that had crossed the line. She had been convinced that her weight was a problem and started to train harder and eat less. The strain on her body had caused bones to break whilst mentally she was depressed and anxious. Stepping away from the sport she dedicated herself to addressing this issue, one that many female athletes are affected by. She studied, became an IOC Young Leader and a certified safeguarding officer. She found a new way of training and rediscovered her love of the sport. Now aged 25, she is back and better than ever, and when not racing she continues to advocate of REDs (relative energy deficiency in sport).
In 1992, the British 400m runner Derek Redmond popped his hamstring in the Olympic semi-final. In absolute agony he got up and started to hobble to the finish line - determined to complete his race. Halfway round, his dad, Jim, ran on to the track to help his son home. It's an Olympic story that's inspired millions of people around the world.
As it’s London Marathon weekend, we focus on a great story about crossing the line at the inaugural London Marathon which took place in 1981. Dick Beardsley and Inge Simonsen who, having battled stride for stride for all 26.2 miles, crossed the line together... hand in hand. In doing so, the pair famously were declared "joint winners" of the London Marathon.
And we’re with two people as they get ready to compete in their very first ever marathons. One a multiple Paralympic champion and the other someone very close to Katie’s heart! So how have they found the training and having never completed the distance before, what are they worries about ahead of race day.
We finish with the ultimate finishing line story. It's in Finland, that's right, it's a Finnish finishing line! Only a few weeks ago two skiers crossed the line and recreated one of the most legendary moments in Winter Olympic history. Exactly 45 years after it happened at the 1980 Lake Placid Games, the two competitors, one a Swede beat his Finnish rival by just one-hundredth of a second, a tiny margin in any event, but the two had been neck and neck for every inch of that 15km cross-country race. In Scandinavia that race is lauded like no other, so it was big news when it was announced they would meet for a rematch all these years on.e years on.
(Photo: Sweden’s Thomas Wassberg and Finland’s Juha Mieto cross the finish line together. CREDIT: Matti Huutoniemi)

Show less










                        Download                    






 Choose your file
                        




                                    Higher quality (128kbps)
                                



                                    Lower quality (64kbps)
                                










5 days left to listen


50 minutes
            







 
Last on 

Saturday
21:06GMT

BBC World Service except East and Southern Africa & West and Central Africa



 
More episodes



Previous











The whole kit and caboodle






Next




Not by the Playbook







            See all episodes from Not by the Playbook
        














Featured








.










Broadcasts





 

Saturday
09:06GMT

BBC World Service



 

Saturday
21:06GMT

BBC World Service except East and Southern Africa & West and Central Africa














Podcast











Not by the Playbook

Inspirational stories from around the world. Interviews with people defying the odds














Related Content


Similar programmes
By genre:
Sport

By format:

Discussion & Talk




 




Online schedule

Downloads

Help & FAQs

Contact us

News in 39 languages









 


     Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Privacy Policy Cookies Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Make an editorial complaint BBC emails for you Advertise with us   Copyright © 2025 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Read about our approach to external linking.                




