https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/3D_computer_graphics




3D computer graphics - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Overview




Toggle Overview subsection





2.1
Modeling








2.2
Layout and animation








2.3
Materials and textures








2.4
Rendering










3
Software




Toggle Software subsection





3.1
File formats








3.2
Modeling








3.3
Computer-aided design (CAD)








3.4
Complementary tools










4
Other types of 3D appearance




Toggle Other types of 3D appearance subsection





4.1
Photorealistic 2D graphics








4.2
2.5D








4.3
Other Forms of Animation










5
See also








6
References








7
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







3D computer graphics



51 languages




العربيةAzərbaycanca閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gúБългарскиBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어HrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаLatviešuLietuviųМакедонскиBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийShqipසිංහලSlovenčinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data
For the academic discipline, see Computer graphics (computer science).
For broader coverage of this topic, see Computer graphics workstation.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "3D computer graphics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Three-dimensional (3D)computer graphics
Fundamentals
Modeling
Scanning
Rendering
Printing

Primary uses
3D models
Computer-aided design
Graphic design
Video games
Visual effects
Visualization
Virtual engineering
Virtual reality
Virtual cinematography

Related topics
Computer-generated imagery (CGI)
Animation
computer
skeletal
3D display
Wire-frame model
Texture mapping
Motion capture
Crowd simulation
Global illumination
Volume rendering
vte
3D computer graphics, sometimes called CGI, 3D-CGI or three-dimensional computer graphics, are graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data (often Cartesian) that is stored in the computer for the purposes of performing calculations and rendering digital images, usually 2D images but sometimes 3D images. The resulting images may be stored for viewing later (possibly as an animation) or displayed in real time.
3D computer graphics, contrary to what the name suggests, are most often displayed on two-dimensional displays. Unlike 3D film and similar techniques, the result is two-dimensional, without visual depth. More often, 3D graphics are being displayed on 3D displays, like in virtual reality systems.
3D graphics stand in contrast to 2D computer graphics which typically use completely different methods and formats for creation and rendering.
3D computer graphics rely on many of the same algorithms as 2D computer vector graphics in the wire-frame model and 2D computer raster graphics in the final rendered display. In computer graphics software, 2D applications may use 3D techniques to achieve effects such as lighting, and similarly, 3D may use some 2D rendering techniques.
The objects in 3D computer graphics are often referred to as 3D models. Unlike the rendered image, a model's data is contained within a graphical data file. A 3D model is a mathematical representation of any three-dimensional object; a model is not technically a graphic until it is displayed. A model can be displayed visually as a two-dimensional image through a process called 3D rendering, or it can be used in non-graphical computer simulations and calculations. With 3D printing, models are rendered into an actual 3D physical representation of themselves, with some limitations as to how accurately the physical model can match the virtual model.[1]


History[edit]
Main article: History of computer animation
William Fetter was credited with coining the term computer graphics in 1961[2][3] to describe his work at Boeing. An early example of interactive 3-D computer graphics was explored in 1963 by the Sketchpad program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory.[4] One of the first displays of computer animation was Futureworld (1976), which included an animation of a human face and a hand that had originally appeared in the 1971 experimental short A Computer Animated Hand, created by University of Utah students Edwin Catmull and Fred Parke.[5]
3-D computer graphics software began appearing for home computers in the late 1970s. The earliest known example is 3D Art Graphics, a set of 3-D computer graphics effects, written by Kazumasa Mitazawa and released in June 1978 for the Apple II.[6][7]
Virtual Reality 3D is a version of 3D computer graphics.[8] With the first headset coming out in the late 1950s, the popularity of VR didn't take off until the 2000s. In 2012 the Oculus was released and since then, the 3D VR headset world has expanded.[9]

Overview[edit]
3D computer graphics production workflow falls into three basic phases: 

3D modeling – the process of forming a computer model of an object's shape
Layout and CGI animation – the placement and movement of objects (models, lights etc.) within a scene
3D rendering – the computer calculations that, based on light placement, surface types, and other qualities, generate (rasterize the scene into) an image
Modeling[edit]
Main article: 3D modeling
The modeling describes the process of forming the shape of an object. The two most common sources of 3D models are those that an artist or engineer originates on the computer with some kind of 3D modeling tool, and models scanned into a computer from real-world objects (Polygonal Modeling, Patch Modeling and NURBS Modeling are some popular tools used in 3D modeling). Models can also be produced procedurally or via physical simulation. 
Basically, a 3D model is formed from points called vertices that define the shape and form polygons. A polygon is an area formed from at least three vertices (a triangle). A polygon of n points is an n-gon.[10] The overall integrity of the model and its suitability to use in animation depend on the structure of the polygons.

Layout and animation[edit]
Main article: Computer animation
Before rendering into an image, objects must be laid out in a 3D scene. This defines spatial relationships between objects, including location and size. Animation refers to the temporal description of an object (i.e., how it moves and deforms over time. Popular methods include keyframing, inverse kinematics, and motion-capture). These techniques are often used in combination. As with animation, physical simulation also specifies motion.
Stop Motion has multiple categories within such as Claymation, Cutout, Silhouette, Lego, Puppets, and Pixelation.[11]
Claymation is the use of models made of clay used for an animation. Some examples are Clay Fighter and Clay Jam.[11]
Lego animation is one of the more common types of stop motion. Lego stop motion is the use of the figures themselves moving around. Some examples of this are Lego Island and Lego Harry Potter.[11]

Materials and textures[edit]
Materials and textures are properties that the render engine uses to render the model. One can give the model materials to tell the render engine how to treat light when it hits the surface. Textures are used to give the material color using a color or albedo map, or give the surface features using a bump map or normal map. It can be also used to deform the model itself using a displacement map.

Rendering[edit]
Main article: 3D rendering
Rendering converts a model into an image either by simulating light transport to get photo-realistic images, or by applying an art style as in non-photorealistic rendering. The two basic operations in realistic rendering are transport (how much light gets from one place to another) and scattering (how surfaces interact with light). This step is usually performed using 3-D computer graphics software or a 3-D graphics API.  
Altering the scene into a suitable form for rendering also involves 3D projection, which displays a three-dimensional image in two dimensions. Although 3-D modeling and CAD software may perform 3-D rendering as well (e.g., Autodesk 3ds Max or Blender), exclusive 3-D rendering software also exists (e.g., OTOY's Octane Rendering Engine, Maxon's Redshift) 


Examples of 3-D rendering


A 3-D rendering with ray tracing and ambient occlusion using Blender and YafaRay



A 3-D model of a Dunkerque-class battleship rendered with flat shading



During the 3-D rendering step, the number of reflections "light rays" can take, as well as various other attributes, can be tailored to achieve a desired visual effect. Rendered with Cobalt.



A 3-D rendering of a penthouse


Software[edit]
3-D computer graphics software produces computer-generated imagery (CGI) through 3D modeling and 3D rendering or produces 3-D models for analytical, scientific and industrial purposes.

File formats[edit]
Main article: List of file formats § 3-D graphics
There are many varieties of files supporting 3-D graphics, for example, Wavefront .obj files and .x DirectX files. Each file type generally tends to have its own unique data structure.
Each file format can be accessed through their respective applications, such as DirectX files, and Quake. Alternatively, files can be accessed through third-party standalone programs, or via manual decompilation.

Modeling[edit]
Main article: 3D modeling
3-D modeling software is a class of 3-D computer graphics software used to produce 3-D models. Individual programs of this class are called modeling applications or modelers.
3-D modeling starts by describing 3 display models : Drawing Points, Drawing Lines and Drawing triangles and other Polygonal patches.[12]
3-D modelers allow users to create and alter models via their 3-D mesh. Users can add, subtract, stretch and otherwise change the mesh to their desire. Models can be viewed from a variety of angles, usually simultaneously. Models can be rotated and the view can be zoomed in and out.
3-D modelers can export their models to files, which can then be imported into other applications as long as the metadata are compatible. Many modelers allow importers and exporters to be plugged-in, so they can read and write data in the native formats of other applications.
Most 3-D modelers contain a number of related features, such as ray tracers and other rendering alternatives and texture mapping facilities. Some also contain features that support or allow animation of models. Some may be able to generate full-motion video of a series of rendered scenes (i.e. animation).

Computer-aided design (CAD)[edit]
Main article: Computer-aided design
Computer aided design software may employ the same fundamental 3-D modeling techniques that 3-D modeling software use but their goal differs. They are used in computer-aided engineering, computer-aided manufacturing, Finite element analysis, product lifecycle management, 3D printing and computer-aided architectural design.

Complementary tools[edit]
After producing a video, studios then edit or composite the video using programs such as Adobe Premiere Pro or Final Cut Pro at the mid-level, or Autodesk Combustion, Digital Fusion, Shake at the high-end. Match moving software is commonly used to match live video with computer-generated video, keeping the two in sync as the camera moves.
Use of real-time computer graphics engines to create a cinematic production is called machinima.[13]

Other types of 3D appearance[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Photorealistic 2D graphics[edit]
See also: Still life § 21st century
Not all computer graphics that appear 3D are based on a wireframe model. 2D computer graphics with 3D photorealistic effects are often achieved without wire-frame modeling and are sometimes indistinguishable in the final form. Some graphic art software includes filters that can be applied to 2D vector graphics or 2D raster graphics on transparent layers. Visual artists may also copy or visualize 3D effects and manually render photo-realistic effects without the use of filters.

2.5D[edit]
Main article: 2.5D
Some video games use 2.5D graphics, involving restricted projections of three-dimensional environments, such as isometric graphics or virtual cameras with fixed angles, either as a way to improve performance of the game engine or for stylistic and gameplay concerns. By contrast, games using 3D computer graphics without such restrictions are said[by whom?] to use true 3D.

Other Forms of Animation[edit]
Cutout is the use of flat materials such as paper. Everything is cut out of paper including the environment, characters, and even some props. An example of this is Paper Mario.[14]
Silhouette is similar to cutouts except they are one solid color, black. Limbo is an example of this.[14]
Puppets are dolls and different puppets used in the game. An example of this would be Yoshi's Wooly World.[14]
Pixelation is when the entire game appears pixelated, this includes the characters and the environment around them. One example of this is seen in Shovel Knight.[14]

See also[edit]
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
List of 3D computer graphics software
3D data acquisition and object reconstruction
3D projection on 2D planes
Geometry processing
Isometric graphics in video games and pixel art
List of stereoscopic video games
Medical animation
Render farm
References[edit]


^ "3D computer graphics". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 2019-01-19.

^ "An Historical Timeline of Computer Graphics and Animation". Archived from the original on 2008-03-10. Retrieved 2009-07-22.

^ "Computer Graphics". Learning Computer History. 5 December 2004.

^ Ivan Sutherland Sketchpad Demo 1963, 30 May 2012, retrieved 2023-04-25

^ "Pixar founder's Utah-made Hand added to National Film Registry". The Salt Lake Tribune. December 28, 2011. Retrieved January 8, 2012.

^ "Brutal Deluxe Software". www.brutaldeluxe.fr.

^ "Retrieving Japanese Apple II programs". Projects and Articles. neoncluster.com. Archived from the original on 2016-10-05.

^ Garg, Nitin (2024-11-15). "A Comprehensive Guide on Different Types of 3D Animation". BR Softech. Retrieved 2024-11-21.

^ Flynt, Joseph (2019-08-12). "The History of VR: When was it created and who invented it?". 3D Insider. Retrieved 2024-11-21.

^ Simmons, Bruce. "n-gon". MathWords. Archived from the original on 2018-12-15. Retrieved 2018-11-30.

^ a b c Garg, Nitin (2024-11-15). "A Comprehensive Guide on Different Types of 3D Animation". BR Softech. Retrieved 2024-11-21.

^ Buss, Samuel R. (2003-05-19). 3D Computer Graphics: A Mathematical Introduction with OpenGL. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-44038-7.

^ "Machinima". Internet Archive. Retrieved 2020-07-12.

^ a b c d Garg, Nitin (2024-11-15). "A Comprehensive Guide on Different Types of 3D Animation". BR Softech. Retrieved 2024-11-21.

[1]
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to 3D computer graphics.




Look up computer graphics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation (Wayback Machine copy)
How Stuff Works - 3D Graphics
History of Computer Graphics series of articles[usurped] (Wayback Machine copy)
How 3D Works - Explains 3D modeling for an illuminated manuscript
vteComputer graphicsVector graphics
Diffusion curve
Pixel
2D graphics
Alpha compositing
Layers
Text-to-image
2.5D
Isometric graphics
Mode 7
Parallax scrolling
Ray casting
Skybox

3D graphics
3D projection
3D rendering
(Image-based
Spectral
Unbiased)
Aliasing
Anisotropic filtering
Cel shading
Fluid animation
Lighting
Global illumination
Hidden-surface determination
Polygon mesh
(Triangle mesh)
Shading
Deferred
Surface triangulation
Wire-frame model
Concepts
Affine transformation
Back-face culling
Clipping
Collision detection
Planar projection
Reflection
Rendering
Beam tracing
Cone tracing
Checkerboard rendering
Ray tracing
Path tracing
Ray casting
Scanline rendering
Rotation
Scaling
Shadow mapping
Shadow volume
Shear matrix
Shader
Texel
Translation
Volume rendering
Voxel
Graphics software
3D computer graphics software
animation
modeling
rendering
Raster graphics editors
Vector graphics editors
Algorithms
List of computer graphics algorithms

vteAnimation topicsBy country
Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
Czechia
Estonia
India
Japan
Malaysia
Mexico
North Korea
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Taiwan
Thailand
United States
Vietnam
History
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Hungary
India
Iran
Japan
Korea
Russia
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Silent Era
The Golden Age
World War II
Early TV broadcast era
Modern TV cable and streaming era
Industry
Animator
List
Animation department
Animation director
Story artist
Animation studios
List
Animation database
Art pipeline
Biologist simulators
Animation film festivals
international
regional
Highest-grossing films (Opening weekends)
Outsourcing
International Animation Day
Works
Films
Computer-animated
Feature-length
Lost or unfinished
Package
Short
Short series
Stop-motion
Adult animated films
Children's animated films
Series
Adult animated
Children's animated
Computer-animated
Direct-to-video
Flash
Internet
Television
TechniquesTraditional
Barrier-grid and stereography
Flip book
Limited animation
Masking
Rotoscoping
Exposure sheet
Stop motion
Claymation
clay painting, strata-cut
Cutout (silhouette)
Graphic
Model
go motion
Object
Brickfilm
Pixilation
Puppetoons
Computer (history, timeline)2D
2.5D
Flash
PowerPoint
SVG
CSS
Multi-sketch
Onion skinning
3D
T-pose
Cel shading
CGI
Crowd
Facial animation
Morph target
Motion capture
facial
hand tracking
eye tracking
Non-photorealistic rendering
Physically based animation
Procedural
Skeletal
Virtual cinematography
Puppetry
Traditional puppetry
Digital puppetry
Machinima
Aniforms
Virtual human
Live2D
Supermarionation
Mechanical
Animatronics
Audio-Animatronics
Linear Animation Generator
Direct manipulation animation
Humanoid animation
Idle animation
Ink-wash animation
Magic Lantern
Scanimate
Shadowmation
Squigglevision
Whiteboard animation
Other methods
Blocking
Character animation
model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model
Chuckimation
Drawn-on-film
Erasure animation
Hydrotechnics
Inbetweening
Morphing
Paint-on-glass
Pinscreen
Pixel art
Pose to pose
Straight ahead
Rubber hose
Special effects
Sand
Syncro-Vox
Zoetrope
Variants
Abstract animation (visual music)
Adult animation
Animated cartoon
Animated sitcom
Animated documentary
Anime
influenced
Educational animation
Erotic animation
Independent animation
Instructional animation
Virtual newscaster
Related topics
Animation music
Bouncing ball
Mickey Mousing
Key frame
Cel
Character animation
model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model
Creature animation
Twelve basic principles
Motion comic
Films with live action and animation
highest grossing
Cartoon
physics
violence
Most expensive animated films
List of animated films by box office admissions
List of animated television series by episode count
anime series
anime franchises

 Category
 Portal
Outline

vte3D computer graphics softwareOpen-source
3D Movie Maker
Blender
CloudCompare
FreeCAD
GigaMesh Software Framework
LuxCoreRender
MakeHuman
MeshLab
MoonRay
OpenFX
OpenSCAD
Point Cloud Library
POV-Ray
Seamless3d
Sweet Home 3D
Wings 3D
Closed-source
3D-Coat
AC3D
Arnold
Autodesk 3ds Max
Autodesk Alias
Autodesk Maya
Autodesk Mudbox
Blackmagic Fusion
Bryce
Carrara
Cinema 4D
Clara.io
Daz Studio
Electric Image Animation System
E-on Vue
Golaem Crowd
Hexagon
Houdini
Kerkythea
LightWave 3D
MASSIVE
Medium by Adobe
Messiah
Nuke
Octane Render
Paint 3D
Pixar Presto
Pixar RenderMan
Poser
Remo 3D
Rhinoceros 3D
Shade 3D
Shark 3D
Silo
SketchUp
Source Filmmaker
Strata 3D
Terragen
ZBrush
Defunct
Amapi
Autodesk Softimage
Cyber Studio CAD-3D
Dynamation
Imagine
Modo
N-World
PowerAnimator
Sculpt 3D
Softimage 3D
StrataVision 3D
Swift 3D
TrueSpace
TurboSilver
VistaPro
Core technologies
ACIS
C3D
HOOPS 3D
KernelCAD
Open Cascade Technology
Parasolid
Romulus
RGK
ShapeManager
Teigha
IntelliCAD

 Comparison
 Category
 List
3D modeling
3D rendering

Authority control databases: National Japan2Czech Republic

^ "A Beginner's Guide to the Concept of 3D in Computer Graphics". ThePro3DStudio. Retrieved 2024-08-22.






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=3D_computer_graphics&oldid=1281702305"
Categories: 3D computer graphicsScience fiction themesComputer graphics3D graphics software3D imagingVisual effectsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from April 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from September 2023Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2023Commons category link from Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 21 March 2025, at 23:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







3D computer graphics




























51 languages


Add topic
















