https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atanasoff%E2%80%93Berry_Computer




Atanasoff–Berry computer - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Overview








2
Design and construction








3
Function








4
Patent dispute








5
Replica








6
See also








7
References








8
Bibliography








9
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Atanasoff–Berry computer



21 languages




БългарскиCatalàDeutschEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어Italianoעבריתनेपाल भाषा日本語PolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSuomiไทยУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Atanasoff–Berry Computer)
Early electronic digital computing device
Atanasoff–Berry computer (ABC)Atanasoff–Berry computer replica at Durham Center, Iowa State UniversityDeveloperJohn Vincent Atanasoff with help of graduate student Clifford BerryRelease date1942; 83 years ago (1942)CPUMore than 300 vacuum tubes @ 60 HzMemory3000 bitsDisplayDecimal, via a front panel displayInputDecimal, via standard IBM 80-column punched cardsWeight700 pounds (320 kg)
The Atanasoff–Berry computer (ABC) was the first automatic electronic digital computer.[1] The device was limited by the technology of the day. The ABC's priority is debated among historians of computer technology, because it was neither programmable, nor Turing-complete.[2] Conventionally, the ABC would be considered the first electronic ALU (arithmetic logic unit) –  which is integrated into every modern processor's design.
Its unique contribution was to make computing faster by being the first to use vacuum tubes to do arithmetic calculations. Prior to this, slower electro-mechanical methods were used by Konrad Zuse's Z1 computer, and the simultaneously developed Harvard Mark I. The first electronic, programmable, digital machine,[3] the Colossus computer from 1943 to 1945, used similar tube-based technology as ABC.


Overview[edit]
Conceived in 1937, the machine was built by Iowa State College mathematics and physics professor John Vincent Atanasoff with the help of graduate student Clifford Berry. It was designed only to solve systems of linear equations and was successfully tested in 1942. However, its intermediate result storage mechanism, a paper card writer/reader, was not perfected, and when John Vincent Atanasoff left Iowa State College for World War II assignments, work on the machine was discontinued.[4] The ABC pioneered important elements of modern computing, including binary arithmetic and electronic switching elements, [5] but its special-purpose nature and lack of a changeable, stored program distinguish it from modern computers. The computer was designated an IEEE Milestone in 1990.[6]
Atanasoff and Berry's computer work was not widely known until it was rediscovered in the 1960s, amid patent disputes over the first instance of an electronic computer. At that time ENIAC, that had been created by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert,[7] was considered to be the first computer in the modern sense,[citation needed] but in 1973 a U.S. District Court invalidated the ENIAC patent and concluded that the ENIAC inventors had derived the subject matter of the electronic digital computer from Atanasoff. When, in the mid-1970s, the secrecy surrounding the British World War II development of the Colossus computers that pre-dated ENIAC, was lifted[8][9] and Colossus was described at a conference in Los Alamos, New Mexico, in June 1976, John Mauchly and Konrad Zuse were reported to have been astonished.[10]

Design and construction[edit]
Diagram of the ABC pointing out its various components
According to Atanasoff's account, several key principles of the Atanasoff–Berry computer were conceived in a sudden insight after a long nighttime drive to Rock Island, Illinois, during the winter of 1937–38. The ABC innovations included electronic computation, binary arithmetic, parallel processing, regenerative capacitor memory, and a separation of memory and computing functions.[11] The mechanical and logic design was worked out by Atanasoff over the next year. A grant application to build a proof of concept prototype was submitted in March 1939 to the Agronomy department, which was also interested in speeding up computation for economic and research analysis. $5,000 of further funding (equivalent to $113,000 in 2024) to complete the machine came from the nonprofit Research Corporation of New York City.[citation needed]
The ABC was built by Atanasoff and Berry in the basement of the physics building at Iowa State College from 1939 to 1942. The initial funds were released in September, and the 11-tube prototype was first demonstrated in October 1939. A December demonstration prompted a grant for construction of the full-scale machine.[12][13] The ABC was built and tested over the next two years. A January 15, 1941, story in the Des Moines Register announced the ABC as "an electrical computing machine" with more than 300 vacuum tubes that would "compute complicated algebraic equations" (but gave no precise technical description of the computer). The system weighed more than seven hundred pounds (320 kg). It contained approximately 1-mile (1.6 km) of wire, 280 dual-triode vacuum tubes, 31 thyratrons, and was about the size of a desk.
It was not programmable, which distinguishes it from more general machines of the same era, such as Konrad Zuse's 1941 Z3 (or earlier iterations) and the Colossus computers of 1943–1945. Nor did it implement the stored-program architecture, first implemented in the Manchester Baby of 1948, required for fully general-purpose practical computing machines.

Add-subtract module (reconstructed) from Atanasoff–Berry computer
The machine was, however, the first to implement:

Using vacuum tubes, rather than wheels, ratchets, mechanical switches, or telephone relays, allowing for greater speed than previous computers
Using capacitors for memory, rather than mechanical components, allowing for greater speed and density
The memory of the Atanasoff–Berry computer was a system called regenerative capacitor memory, which consisted of a pair of drums, each containing 1600 capacitors that rotated on a common shaft once per second. The capacitors on each drum were organized into 32 "bands" of 50 (30 active bands and two spares in case a capacitor failed), giving the machine a speed of 30 additions/subtractions per second. Data was represented as 50-bit binary fixed-point numbers. The electronics of the memory and arithmetic units could store and operate on 60 such numbers at a time (3000 bits).
The alternating current power-line frequency of 60 Hz was the primary clock rate for the lowest-level operations.
The arithmetic logic functions were fully electronic, implemented with vacuum tubes. The family of logic gates ranged from inverters to two- and three-input gates. The input and output levels and operating voltages were compatible between the different gates. Each gate consisted of one inverting vacuum-tube amplifier, preceded by a resistor divider input network that defined the logical function. The control logic functions, which only needed to operate once per drum rotation and therefore did not require electronic speed, were electromechanical, implemented with relays.
The ALU operated on only one bit of each number at a time; it kept the carry/borrow bit in a capacitor for use in the next AC cycle.[14]
Although the Atanasoff–Berry computer was an important step up from earlier calculating machines, it was not able to run entirely automatically through an entire problem. An operator was needed to operate the control switches to set up its functions, much like the electro-mechanical calculators and unit record equipment of the time. Selection of the operation to be performed, reading, writing, converting to or from binary to decimal, or reducing a set of equations was made by front-panel switches and, in some cases, jumpers.
There were two forms of input and output: primary user input and output and an intermediate results output and input. The intermediate results storage allowed operation on problems too large to be handled entirely within the electronic memory. (The largest problem that could be solved without the use of the intermediate output and input was two simultaneous equations, a trivial problem.)
Intermediate results were binary, written onto paper sheets by electrostatically modifying the resistance at 1500 locations to represent 30 of the 50-bit numbers (one equation). Each sheet could be written or read in one second. The reliability of the system was limited to about 1 error in 100,000 calculations by these units, primarily attributed to lack of control of the sheets' material characteristics. In retrospect, a solution could have been to add a parity bit to each number as written. This problem was not solved by the time Atanasoff left the university for war-related work.
Primary user input was decimal, via standard IBM 80-column punched cards, and output was decimal, via a front-panel display.

Inside display on I-35 rest stop 100 north of Des Moines honoring the ABC Computer
Outside display on I-35 rest stop 100 north of Des Moines honoring the ABC Computer
Function[edit]
The ABC was designed for a specific purpose –  the solution of systems of simultaneous linear equations. It could handle systems with up to 29 equations, a difficult problem for the time. Problems of this scale were becoming common in physics, the department in which John Atanasoff worked. The machine could be fed two linear equations with up to 29 variables and a constant term and eliminate one of the variables. This process would be repeated manually for each of the equations, which would result in a system of equations with one fewer variable. Then the whole process would be repeated to eliminate another variable.
George W. Snedecor, the head of Iowa State's Statistics Department, was very likely the first user of an electronic digital computer to solve real-world mathematics problems. He submitted many of these problems to Atanasoff.[15]

Patent dispute[edit]
On June 26, 1947, J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly were the first to file for patent on a digital computing device (ENIAC), much to the surprise of Atanasoff. The ABC had been examined by John Mauchly in June 1941, and Isaac Auerbach,[16] a former student of Mauchly's, alleged that it influenced his later work on ENIAC, although Mauchly denied this.[17] The ENIAC patent did not issue until 1964, and by 1967 Honeywell sued Sperry Rand in an attempt to break the ENIAC patents, arguing that the ABC constituted prior art. The United States District Court for the District of Minnesota released its judgement on October 19, 1973, finding in Honeywell v. Sperry Rand that the ENIAC patent was a derivative of John Atanasoff's invention.
Campbell-Kelly and Aspray conclude:[18]

The extent to which Mauchly drew on Atanasoff's ideas remains unknown, and the evidence is massive and conflicting. The ABC was quite modest technology, and it was not fully implemented. At the very least we can infer that Mauchly saw the potential significance of the ABC and that this may have led him to propose a similar, electronic solution.
The case was legally resolved on October 19, 1973, when U.S. District Judge Earl R. Larson held the ENIAC patent invalid, ruling that the ENIAC derived many basic ideas from the Atanasoff–Berry computer. Judge Larson explicitly stated:

Eckert and Mauchly did not themselves first invent the automatic electronic digital computer, but instead derived that subject matter from one Dr. John Vincent Atanasoff.
Herman Goldstine, one of the original developers of ENIAC wrote:[19]

Atanasoff contemplated storing the coefficients of an equation in capacitors located on the periphery of a cylinder. He apparently had a prototype of his machine working "early in 1940". This machine was, it should be emphasized, probably the first use of vacuum tubes to do digital computation and was a special-purpose machine.
This machine never saw the light of day as a serious tool for computation since it was somewhat premature in its engineering conception and limited in its logical one. Nonetheless it must be viewed as a great pioneering effort. Perhaps its chief importance was to influence the thinking of another physicist who was much interested in the computational process, John W. Mauchly. During the period of Atanasoff's work on his linear equation solver, Mauchly was at Ursinus College, a small school in the environs of Philadelphia. Somehow he became aware of Atanasoff's project and visited him for a week in 1941. During the visit the two men apparently went into Atanasoff's ideas in considerable detail. The discussion greatly influenced Mauchly and through him the entire history of electronic computers.
Replica[edit]
The original ABC was eventually dismantled in 1948,[20] when the university converted the basement to classrooms, and all of its pieces except for one memory drum were discarded.
In 1997, a team of researchers led by Delwyn Bluhm and John Gustafson from Ames Laboratory (located on the Iowa State University campus) finished building a working replica of the Atanasoff–Berry computer at a cost of $350,000 (equivalent to $686,000 in 2024).[21] The replica ABC was on display in the first floor lobby of the Durham Center for Computation and Communication at Iowa State University and was subsequently exhibited at the Computer History Museum.[22]

See also[edit]
History of computing hardware
List of vacuum-tube computers
Mikhail Kravchuk
References[edit]


^ "JVA - Computing History". John Vincent Atanasoff and the Birth Of Electronic Digital Computing. JVA Initiative Committee and Iowa State University. 2011.

^ Copeland, B. Jack (6 April 2018). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 6 April 2018 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Colossus and the German Lorenz Cypher. Anthony Sale, Bletchley Park Trust.

^ Copeland, Jack (2006), Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 101–115, ISBN 0-19-284055-X

^ Campbell-Kelly & Aspray 1996, p. 84.

^ "Milestones:Atanasoff-Berry Computer, 1939". IEEE Global History Network. IEEE. Retrieved 3 August 2011.

^ John Presper Eckert Jr. and John W. Mauchly, Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, U.S. patent 3,120,606, filed 26 June 1947, issued 4 February 1964, and invalidated 19 October 1973 after court ruling on Honeywell v. Sperry Rand.

^ Randell, Brian, Colossus: Godfather of the Computer, 1977 (reprinted in The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1982)

^ Randell, Brian (1980), "The Colossus" (PDF), in Metropolis, N.; Howlett, J.; Rota, Gian-Carlo (eds.), A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, pp. 47–92, ISBN 978-0124916500, retrieved 2016-09-19

^ Bemer, Bob, Colossus – World War II Computer: The First Word Processor, archived from the original on 2000-08-19, retrieved 2020-07-16 Report of the announcement of Colossus at the International Research Conference on the History of Computing, in Los Alamos, New Mexico, that began on 10 June 1976

^ "The History of Computing". mason.gmu.edu. Retrieved 6 April 2018.

^ Mollenhoff, Clark R. (1988), Atanasoff: Forgotten Father of the Computer, Ames: Iowa State University Press, pp. 47, 48, ISBN 0-8138-0032-3

^ Hudson, David; Bergman, Marvin; Horton, Loren (2009). The Biographical Dictionary of Iowa. University of Iowa Press. p. 22. ISBN 9781587297243.

^ 
John Gustafson.
"Reconstruction of the Atanasoff-Berry Computer".
Quote: "the total vacuum tube count was very low: about 300 for the entire machine. Much of this economy is the result of operating on only one bit of each number at a time, keeping the carry/borrow bit in a capacitor for use in the next cycle."

^ Rojas, Raúl (2002). The First Computers: History and Architectures. MIT Press. p. 102. ISBN 0-262-68137-4.

^ Auerbach, Isaac L. (Isaac Levin) (1 October 1992). "Oral history interview with Isaac Levin Auerbach". umn.edu. Retrieved 6 April 2018.

^ Shurkin, Joel N. (1985), Engines of the Mind (Reprint edition (1 Aug. 1985) ed.), Pocket Books, pp. 280–299, ISBN 978-0671600365

^ Campbell-Kelly & Aspray 1996, p. 86.

^ Herman Goldstine, "The Computer from Pascal to von Neumann", 1972; pp. 125–126.

^ Soltis, Frank G. (2001). Fortress Rochester: The Inside Story of the IBM ISeries. System iNetwork. p. 364. ISBN 9781583040836.

^ "ABC Reconstruction, 1994-1997" (Press release). Iowa State University and John Vincent Atanasoff Initiative Committee. 2011.

^ Krapfl, Mike (2010). "Iowa State Replica of First Electronic Digital Computer to be Displayed at Computer History Museum" (PDF). ECpE Connections. Ames, Iowa: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University. p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09. Retrieved November 26, 2020.


Bibliography[edit]

Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William (1996), Computer: A History of the Information Machine, New York, NY: Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-02989-2
Edwards, John (Nov 22, 2010), "John Atanasoff and Clifford Berry: Inventing The ABC, A Benchmark Digital Computer", Electronic Design, 58 (16): 58–59
Mackintosh, Allan R. (August 1988), "Dr. Atanasoff's Computer", Scientific American, vol. 259, no. 2, pp. 90–96, Bibcode:1988SciAm.259b..90M, doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0888-90, PMID 3064298, archived from the original on 2024-05-24
O’Regan, Gerard (2012), A Brief History of Computing (2nd ed.), New York: Springer, ISBN 978-1-4471-2358-3
Ralston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D., eds. (1993), Encyclopedia of Computer Science (3rd ed.), New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, ISBN 0-442-27679-6

External links[edit]
The Birth of the ABC
Reconstruction of the ABC, 1994-1997
John Gustafson, Reconstruction of the Atanasoff-Berry Computer
The ENIAC patent trial
Honeywell v. Sperry Rand Records, 1846-1973, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota.
The Atanasoff-Berry Computer In Operation (YouTube)
vteProcessor technologiesModels
Abstract machine
Stored-program computer
Finite-state machine
with datapath
Hierarchical
Deterministic finite automaton
Queue automaton
Cellular automaton
Quantum cellular automaton
Turing machine
Alternating Turing machine
Universal
Post–Turing
Quantum
Nondeterministic Turing machine
Probabilistic Turing machine
Hypercomputation
Zeno machine
Belt machine
Stack machine
Register machines
Counter
Pointer
Random-access
Random-access stored program
Architecture
Microarchitecture
Von Neumann
Harvard
modified
Dataflow
Transport-triggered
Cellular
Endianness
Memory access
NUMA
HUMA
Load–store
Register/memory
Cache hierarchy
Memory hierarchy
Virtual memory
Secondary storage
Heterogeneous
Fabric
Multiprocessing
Cognitive
Neuromorphic
Instruction setarchitecturesTypes
Orthogonal instruction set
CISC
RISC
Application-specific
EDGE
TRIPS
VLIW
EPIC
MISC
OISC
NISC
ZISC
VISC architecture
Quantum computing
Comparison
Addressing modes
Instructionsets
Motorola 68000 series
VAX
PDP-11
x86
ARM
Stanford MIPS
MIPS
MIPS-X
Power
POWER
PowerPC
Power ISA
Clipper architecture
SPARC
SuperH
DEC Alpha
ETRAX CRIS
M32R
Unicore
Itanium
OpenRISC
RISC-V
MicroBlaze
LMC
System/3x0
S/360
S/370
S/390
z/Architecture
Tilera ISA
VISC architecture
Epiphany architecture
Others
ExecutionInstruction pipelining
Pipeline stall
Operand forwarding
Classic RISC pipeline
Hazards
Data dependency
Structural
Control
False sharing
Out-of-order
Scoreboarding
Tomasulo's algorithm
Reservation station
Re-order buffer
Register renaming
Wide-issue
Speculative
Branch prediction
Memory dependence prediction
ParallelismLevel
Bit
Bit-serial
Word
Instruction
Pipelining
Scalar
Superscalar
Task
Thread
Process
Data
Vector
Memory
Distributed
Multithreading
Temporal
Simultaneous
Hyperthreading
Simultaneous and heterogenous
Speculative
Preemptive
Cooperative
Flynn's taxonomy
SISD
SIMD
Array processing (SIMT)
Pipelined processing
Associative processing
SWAR
MISD
MIMD
SPMD
Processorperformance
Transistor count
Instructions per cycle (IPC)
Cycles per instruction (CPI)
Instructions per second (IPS)
Floating-point operations per second (FLOPS)
Transactions per second (TPS)
Synaptic updates per second (SUPS)
Performance per watt (PPW)
Cache performance metrics
Computer performance by orders of magnitude
Types
Central processing unit (CPU)
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
GPGPU
Vector
Barrel
Stream
Tile processor
Coprocessor
PAL
ASIC
FPGA
FPOA
CPLD
Multi-chip module (MCM)
System in a package (SiP)
Package on a package (PoP)
By application
Embedded system
Microprocessor
Microcontroller
Mobile
Ultra-low-voltage
ASIP
Soft microprocessor
Systemson chip
System on a chip (SoC)
Multiprocessor (MPSoC)
Cypress PSoC
Network on a chip (NoC)
Hardwareaccelerators
Coprocessor
AI accelerator
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
Image processor
Vision processing unit (VPU)
Physics processing unit (PPU)
Digital signal processor (DSP)
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
Secure cryptoprocessor
Network processor
Baseband processor

Word size
1-bit
4-bit
8-bit
12-bit
15-bit
16-bit
24-bit
32-bit
48-bit
64-bit
128-bit
256-bit
512-bit
bit slicing
others
variable
Core count
Single-core
Multi-core
Manycore
Heterogeneous architecture
Components
Core
Cache
CPU cache
Scratchpad memory
Data cache
Instruction cache
replacement policies
coherence
Bus
Clock rate
Clock signal
FIFO
Functionalunits
Arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
Address generation unit (AGU)
Floating-point unit (FPU)
Memory management unit (MMU)
Load–store unit
Translation lookaside buffer (TLB)
Branch predictor
Branch target predictor
Integrated memory controller (IMC)
Memory management unit
Instruction decoder
Logic
Combinational
Sequential
Glue
Logic gate
Quantum
Array
Registers
Processor register
Status register
Stack register
Register file
Memory buffer
Memory address register
Program counter
Control unit
Hardwired control unit
Instruction unit
Data buffer
Write buffer
Microcode ROM
Counter
Datapath
Multiplexer
Demultiplexer
Adder
Multiplier
CPU
Binary decoder
Address decoder
Sum-addressed decoder
Barrel shifter
Circuitry
Integrated circuit
3D
Mixed-signal
Power management
Boolean
Digital
Analog
Quantum
Switch

Powermanagement
PMU
APM
ACPI
Dynamic frequency scaling
Dynamic voltage scaling
Clock gating
Performance per watt (PPW)
Related
History of general-purpose CPUs
Microprocessor chronology
Processor design
Digital electronics
Hardware security module
Semiconductor device fabrication
Tick–tock model
Pin grid array
Chip carrier

vteIowa State UniversityLocated in: Ames, IowaAcademicsColleges
Business
Engineering
Human Sciences
Liberal Arts & Sciences
Veterinary Medicine
AthleticsTeams
Baseball (defunct)
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Cross country
Football
Golf
Gymnastics
Soccer (women's)
Softball
Swimming & diving
Track & field
Volleyball
Wrestling
Venues
Ames/ISU Ice Arena
Cap Timm Field
Jack Trice Stadium
Hilton Coliseum
Veenker Memorial Golf Course
Rivalries
Iowa
Cy-Hawk Trophy
Cy-Hawk Series
Iowa Big Four
Big Four Classic
Kansas State (football)
Missouri (football) (defunct)
Culture
Cy the Cardinal
Hall of Fame
ISU Fights
Marching Band
Campus
Buildings
Campanile
Reiman Gardens
Iowa State Center
Alumni Center
Beardshear Hall
Enrollment Services Center
Memorial Union
Morrill Hall
Farm House
Carver Hall
Catt Hall
Fick Observatory
Research
Ames Laboratory
Ames Project
Atanasoff–Berry computer
CYCLONE
Honeywell v. Sperry Rand
Spacecraft Systems and Controls Lab
StrangeSearch
BugGuide
VRAC
Student life
Iowa State Daily
KURE
PrISUm
VEISHEA
CyRide
Cuffs
People
Notable alumni and faculty
ISU Presidents
John Vincent Atanasoff
George Washington Carver
Carrie Chapman Catt
Tom Knudson
Jack Trice
G. Malcolm Trout

Founded: 1858





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atanasoff–Berry_computer&oldid=1267656250"
Categories: 1940s computersOne-of-a-kind computersVacuum tube computersComputer-related introductions in 1942Early computersIowa State UniversitySerial computersPaper data storageHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2020Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016






 This page was last edited on 6 January 2025, at 02:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Atanasoff–Berry computer




























21 languages


Add topic
















