https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Museum_of_Science_and_Industry_(Manchester)




Science and Industry Museum - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Exhibitions




Toggle Exhibitions subsection





2.1
Computing and communications








2.2
Locomotives










3
Former galleries




Toggle Former galleries subsection





3.1
Some past exhibitions










4
Railway








5
Industrial machines








6
Adjacent St John's Quarter








7
See also








8
References








9
Further reading








10
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Science and Industry Museum



7 languages




বাংলাDeutschFrançaisNederlandsPortuguêsРусский中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide









Coordinates: 53°28′37″N 2°15′20″W﻿ / ﻿53.47694°N 2.25556°W﻿ / 53.47694; -2.25556

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Museum of Science and Industry (Manchester))
Museum in Manchester, England


Science and Industry MuseumEntrance structure reflecting its science/industrial themesLocation within Greater ManchesterEstablished15 September 1983LocationLiverpool Road, Manchester, EnglandCoordinates53°28′37″N 2°15′20″W﻿ / ﻿53.47694°N 2.25556°W﻿ / 53.47694; -2.25556TypeScience museumVisitors556,523 (2019)[1]Public transit accessMetroshuttle  – Green RouteWebsitescienceandindustrymuseum.org.ukScience Museum Group
National Railway Museum
Locomotion Museum
Science & Media
Science & Industry
Science Museum
Dana Research Centre and Library
National Collections Centre

Oddfellows Hall, the first home of the museum
Exterior of the museum's Air and Space Hall
A kamikaze Ohka aircraft in exhibition
The Science and Industry Museum in Manchester, England, traces the development of science, technology and industry with emphasis on the city's achievements in these fields. The museum is part of the Science Museum Group, a non-departmental public body of the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, having merged with the National Science Museum in 2012.[2]
There are extensive displays on the theme of transport (cars, railway locomotives and rolling stock), power (water, electricity, steam and gas engines), Manchester's sewerage and sanitation, textiles, communications and computing.
The museum is an Anchor Point of the European Route of Industrial Heritage and is on the site of the world's first passenger railway station – Manchester Liverpool Road – which opened as part of the Liverpool & Manchester Railway in 1830. The railway station frontage and 1830 warehouse are both Grade I listed.


History[edit]
The museum was called the North Western Museum of Science and Industry when it opened in 1969 in temporary premises on Grosvenor Street in Chorlton-on-Medlock. It had close ties with the University of Manchester Institute of Science & Technology, having mostly grown out of the Department of History of Science & Technology, and UMIST's Richard L. Hills was the museum's first lecturer in charge.
In 1978, Greater Manchester Council purchased the earliest part of the former Liverpool Road station from British Rail, which had been closed in 1975. The council paid the nominal sum of £1 for the site. The museum opened at this site on 15 September 1983 and later expanded to include the whole of the former station.[3]
Since 2007 the museum has organised an annual science festival in Manchester.
In 2014, Sally MacDonald became the director. MacDonald left her role as head of collections at University College London and succeeded Jean Franczyk as director.[4]
In 2021, the permanent closure of the Air and Space Hall was announced. Objects were returned to their original owners, and those owned by the museum displayed in future exhibits.[5][6][7]

Exhibitions[edit]
Exhibits at the Science and Industry Museum include:

Computing and communications[edit]
A replica of the Manchester Baby
A Connected Earth gallery that tells the history of communications in Manchester and the North West of England opened in October 2007.
Locomotives[edit]
NS 1505 Ariadne outside the museum
Ericsson's Novelty – A replica incorporating parts from the original locomotive of 1829
British Rail Class 77 No. 27001, liveried as Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways) No. 1505, Ariadne – A 1.5 kV DC electric locomotive built by Metropolitan-Vickers in 1953
South African Railways GL class Garratt No. 2352 – Built in 1929 by Beyer, Peacock & Company, Manchester
Pakistan Railways 4–4–0  No. 3157 (broad gauge) Originally built for North Western Railway of India by Vulcan Foundry, Newton-le-Willows (around 1911–1914).
Former galleries[edit]
Previous permanent exhibition galleries which have now been decommissioned include:

Electricity Gallery - generation, distribution and use of electricity
Gas Gallery - past to present look at the gas industry
Underground Manchester - sanitation and water supply
A space-themed gallery, with exhibits encompassing historical space flight, space science and also science-fiction, formerly took up the majority of the upper balcony of the Air and Space hall.  This was eventually considered outdated and removed in its entirety.
Some past exhibitions[edit]
Body Worlds 4 between 22 February and 29 June 2008[8]
LMR 57 Lion Britain's oldest steamable locomotive (in the Museum of Liverpool since 2007)
Stephenson's Rocket – from 25 September 2018 to 8 September 2019[9]
Railway[edit]
9 Planet replica 2-2-0
Until 2018, demonstration passenger trains ran within the museum grounds on selected dates. Trains were hauled by the museum's two operational steam locomotives:

Planet – A replica of Robert Stephenson & Company's Planet class locomotive, built by the Friends of the Museum of Science and Industry in 1992. The original locomotive was constructed in 1830 and hauled trains on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
Agecroft No. 1 – An 0–4–0 saddle tank built by Robert Stephenson & Hawthorns in 1948 for use at Agecroft Power Station. Restored to working order in 2011.
The museum's railway line was connected to the national rail network near Ordsall Lane Junction. However, construction by Network Rail of the Ordsall Chord railway link, which was completed in 2017, severed this connection and significantly shortened the museum's running line despite a legal battle to save it.
As of 2019, railway operations at the museum were suspended indefinitely. In June 2024, the museum confirmed that the railway would not resume operations, citing both the shortened line and concerns over loadbearing issues on the historic structures on the site. The tracks will be incorporated into a redevelopment of the site that will improve accessibility to the area.[10]

Industrial machines[edit]
The last steam engine ever built to power a mill
Spinning machine
The museum exhibits the large collection of stationary steam engines, hot air engines, diesel engines, hydraulic pumps, large electric generators and other similar machines. Most of these machines are operational and occasionally can be seen running. This exhibit includes the last stationary steam engine built to power a mill.
There is also the exhibit of spinning and weaving machines, covering all the steps from wool to textile. These machines are run for a few minutes at scheduled times.

Adjacent St John's Quarter[edit]
Main article: St John's Quarter
This section needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (February 2025)
The museum is adjacent to a £1 billion redevelopment area on the former site of Granada Studios. Work on the area, which will be known as St John's Quarter, is expected to be completed by 2022.[11] The Manchester International Festival's new Factory venue opened alongside the MSI in 2023 as part of the redevelopment.[12][13]
The MSI have been granted planning permission to build a new Special Exhibition Gallery on the ground floor of the New Warehouse. Architectural firm Carmody Groarke won a competition to design the new gallery which is set to be complete by October 2020.[14]
In July 2016 the council stated that, along with development partner Allied London, they had been in talks with the MSI "exploring how the presence of Factory opens up new possibilities for revitalising the whole area below Deansgate as a creative hub, with a joined up and extensive public realm. MSI's own developments plans are being aligned with this creative vision and the museum itself will become part of the creative public realm, with MSI's creative science offer balancing the creative and cultural production of Factory."[12]

See also[edit]
Museum of Transport, Greater Manchester
List of museums in Greater Manchester
List of transport museums
List of aerospace museums
References[edit]


^ "ALVA - Association of Leading Visitor Attractions". alva.org.uk. Retrieved 23 October 2020.

^ "Manchester's MOSI and London's Science Museum to merge". BBC News. 2 December 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2012.

^ "History of the Museum — MOSI". Museum of Science and Industry. Archived from the original on 31 October 2007. Retrieved 14 March 2009.

^ Yakub, Qureshi (May 2014). "Respected curator named as new boss of Museum of Science and Industry". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 1 May 2014.

^ "Air and Space Hall". Twitter. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021.

^ "Science and Industry Museum to leave Grade II-listed Manchester hall". BBC News. 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021.

^ "Ex-Manchester airframes spread far and wide". Aeroplane. 50/3 (587). Key Publishing: 10–11. March 2022.

^ MOSI. "BODY WORLDS 4: The Original Exhibition of Real Human Bodies". Archived from the original on 17 January 2008. Retrieved 14 June 2009.

^ "Stephenson's Rocket returns". Science and Industry Museum. Retrieved 8 April 2019.

^ "Lower and Upper Yard". Science and Industry Museum. Retrieved 24 June 2024.

^ ITV report (27 October 2014). "£1bn vision for former ITV site revealed". Granada Reports. Manchester. Retrieved 23 July 2016.

^ a b Manchester City Council (July 2016). Executive meeting: 16. Updated Draft St Johns Strategic regeneration framework and Factory Manchester (Report). Manchester City Council. p. 11. Retrieved 23 July 2016. Pdf.

^ Brown, Mark (20 June 2023). "Manchester arts venue Factory International renamed after Aviva". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 February 2024.

^ "Science and Industry Museum Special Exhibition Gallery update". Science and Industry Museum. 20 May 2019. Retrieved 2 October 2019.


Further reading[edit]
Hills, Richard L. (2018). The Seven Ages of One Man: or, how one man started the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester. Gloucester: Choir Press. ISBN 9781911589679.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Science and Industry Museum in Manchester.

Official Website
Aeroflight List of Aero collection
Entry in 24 Hour Museum
vteMuseums and galleries in Greater ManchesterArt
Bury Art Museum
Castlefield Gallery
Centre for Chinese Contemporary Art
Cornerhouse
HOME
The Lowry
Manchester Art Gallery
Gallery Oldham
Salford Museum and Art Gallery
Stockport War Memorial Art Gallery
Touchstones Rochdale
Whitworth Art Gallery
Historic house
Bramall Hall
Clayton Hall
Dunham Massey
Elizabeth Gaskell's House
Haigh Hall
Hall i' th' Wood
Heaton Hall
Ordsall Hall
Smithills Hall
Staircase House
Wythenshawe Hall
Local history / culture
Bolton Museum
Museum of Wigan Life
Park Bridge Heritage Centre
Portland Basin Museum
Rochdale Pioneers Museum
Saddleworth Museum
Military and war
Fusilier Museum
Imperial War Museum North
Museum of the Manchester Regiment
Stockport Air Raid Shelters
Natural history
Manchester Museum
Science, engineering,transportation
Bolton Steam Museum
Bury Transport Museum
Ellenroad Engine House
Heaton Park Tramway
Museum of Transport, Greater Manchester
Science & Industry Museum
Trencherfield Mill Steam Engine
Specialized
Astley Green Colliery Museum
British Muslim Heritage Centre
Gallery of Costume
Hat Works
Manchester Jewish Museum
Manchester United Museum
National Football Museum
Pankhurst Centre
People's History Museum
Police Museum
See also
List of museums in Greater Manchester
List of public art in Greater Manchester

vteBritish aviation museumsEnglandnorth
Avro Heritage Museum
Battle of Britain Memorial Flight
Lincolnshire Aviation Heritage Centre
Science and Industry Museum (Manchester)
North East Land, Sea and Air Museums
Real Aeroplane Company
Solway Aviation Museum
South Yorkshire Aircraft Museum
Yorkshire Air Museum
east
City of Norwich Aviation Museum
de Havilland Aircraft Museum
Imperial War Museum Duxford
list
Kent Battle of Britain Museum
Lashenden Air Warfare Museum
Norfolk and Suffolk Aviation Museum
Royal Air Force Museum London
list
Science Museum, London
Shuttleworth Collection
Shoreham Aircraft Museum
The 453rd Bombardment Group Museum
south
Army Flying Museum
Boscombe Down Aviation Collection
Bournemouth Aviation Museum
Brooklands Museum
Farnborough Air Sciences Trust
Gatwick Aviation Museum
Gliding Heritage Centre
Jet Age Museum
Museum of Berkshire Aviation
RAF Manston History Museum
Solent Sky
Tangmere Military Aviation Museum
The Helicopter Museum
Wings Museum
west
Aerospace Bristol
Flambards Theme Park
Fleet Air Arm Museum
Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust Bristol
central
East Midlands Aeropark
Midland Air Museum
Newark Air Museum
Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust Derby and Hucknall
Royal Air Force Museum Midlands
list
Sywell Aviation Museum
Wellesbourne Wartime Museum
Scotland
Dumfries and Galloway Aviation Museum
Montrose Air Station Museum
Morayvia
National Museum of Flight
Rolls-Royce Heritage Trust Scotland
Northern Ireland
Ulster Aviation Society
Ulster Folk and Transport Museums
Isle of Man
Manx Aviation and Military Museum
Wales
South Wales Aviation Museum
Caernarfon Airworld Aviation Museum

vte Department for Culture, Media and SportHeadquarters: 100 Parliament StreetMinistersSecretary of State
Lisa Nandy
Minister of State
Minister of State for Creative Industries, Arts and Tourism: Chris Bryant
Under-Secretariesof State
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Sport, Media, Civil Society and Youth: Stephanie Peacock
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Gambling: The Baroness Twycross
Non-ministerialdepartments
Charity Commission
National Archives
Non-departmentalpublic bodiesAdvisory
Advisory Council on National Records and Archives
Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest
Theatres Trust
Treasure Valuation Committee
Executive
Arts Council England
British Film Institute
Gambling Commission
Historic England
Horserace Betting Levy Board
National Heritage Memorial Fund
National Lottery Community Fund
Sport England
Sports Grounds Safety Authority
UK Anti-Doping
UK Sport
VisitBritain
VisitEngland
Museums
British Library
British Museum
Horniman Museum
Museum of the Home
Imperial War Museums
National Gallery
National Museums Liverpool
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Armouries
Royal Museums Greenwich
Science Museum Group
Sir John Soane's Museum
Tate
Victoria and Albert Museum
Wallace Collection
TribunalHorserace Betting Levy Appeal TribunalOther bodies
BBC
BBC Board
Channel Four Television Corporation
Churches Conservation Trust
Historic Royal Palaces
National Citizen Service
S4C
S4C Authority
The Royal Parks
 Category
vteBuildings and structures in Manchester, EnglandSkyscrapers (over 100 metres)
Deansgate Square South Tower (201m)
Beetham Tower (169m)
Deansgate Square East Tower (158m)
The Blade (154m)
Three60 (154m)
Elizabeth Tower (153m)
Deansgate Square West Tower (141m)
Square Gardens (139m)
Viadux (139m)
Deansgate Square North Tower (122m)
Crown View (119m)
CIS Tower (118m)
Affinity Living Circle Square (116m)
Union Tower 1 (112m)
Oxygen Towers (110m)
Angel Gardens (108m)
City Tower (107m)
Bridgewater Heights (106m)
One Port Street (100m)
High-rises (over 50 metres)
Union Tower 2 (98m)
Artisan Heights (95m)
Axis Tower (93m)
1 Spinningfields (92m)
River Street Tower (92m)
Arndale House (90m)
New Victoria Tower 1 (89m)
Manchester Town Hall Clock Tower (87m)
Cambridge Street Block A (83m)
One Regent (82m)
Civil Justice Centre (81m)
Manchester One (80m)
The Castings (78m)
1 Circle Square (76m)
3 Hardman Street (75m)
Great Northern Tower (72m)
One Angel Square (72m)
3 St Peter's Square (72m)
The Gate, Angel Meadow (68m)
The Light House (67m)
Victoria Residence (67m)
The Principal Manchester (66m)
Victoria Mill (65m)
Albert Bridge House (64m)
111 Piccadilly (64m)
Islington Wharf (64m)
The Slate Yard Flint Building (64m)
Skyline Central (63m)
The Peninsula (63m)
Cambridge Street Block B (63m)
No. 1 Deansgate (62m)
Owens Park Tower (61m)
Brooklyn Hotel (61m)
One Castle Wharf (61m)
Manchester Business School Hotel (60m)
St James's Buildings (60m)
2 Leftbank Apartments (60m)
3 Leftbank Apartments (60m)
3 Piccadilly Place (60m)
Chancery Place (60m)
The Lume (60m)
Affinity Living Circle Square Tower 2 (60m)
One St Peter's Square (59m)
Two St Peter's Square (59m)
Landmark, St. Peter's Square (59m)
2 Circle Square (59m)
Hotel and MSCP, Circle Square (59m)
Lowry House (58m)
Minshull Street Courts (57m)
UNITE Tower (57m)
Cornbrook Works Tower 1 (57m)
Ramada Renaissance Hotel (56m)
Parkway Gate Block 1 (56m)
Royal Exchange Theatre (55m)
1 New York Street (55m)
St James's House (55m)
Bank Chambers (55m)
Vita Circle Square Tower 1 (54m)
Kampus Tower 1 (54m)
Kampus Tower 2 (54m)
Affinity Living Circle Square Tower 3 (54m)
No. 1 Marsden Street (53m)
The Stile, Angel Meadow (53m)
82 King Street (52m)
Oxygen Tower 2 (52m)
Vox Tower 1 (51m)
Kampus Tower 3 (51m)
New Century House (50m)
Hexagon Tower (50m)
Parkway Gate Block 2 (50m)
Notable low-rises(city centre or Grade II* listed)
1 The Avenue
1–3 York Street
25 St Ann Street
38 and 42 Mosley Street
46–48 Brown Street
50 Newton Street
53 King Street
84 Plymouth Grove
100 King Street
Afflecks
Alan Turing Building
Albert Hall
Ancoats Hospital
Arkwright House
Athenaeum
Baguley Hall
Bank Chambers
Barlow Hall
Barton Arcade
Central Library
Chetham's Library
Chips
Clayton Hall
Corn Exchange
County Court
Daily Express
Dalton-Ellis Hall
Didsbury Campus
Estate Exchange
Former Bank of England
Free Trade Hall
Gateway House
Old Granada Studios
The Green Building
Grove House
The Haçienda
Hanover Building
Heaton Hall
Holyoake House
Hough End Hall
Hulme Hall
Hulme Hippodrome
Institute of Biotechnology
John Rylands Library
John Rylands University Library
Kendals
Lawrence Buildings
Law Library
Lincoln House
London Road Fire Station
Manchester Art Gallery
Manchester Museum
Mechanics' Institute
Memorial Hall
Midland Hotel
Minshull Street Crown Courts
Science and Industry Museum
National Graphene Institute
Nicholls Building
Odeon Cinema
Old Wellington Inn
One Piccadilly Gardens
Pankhurst Centre
People's History Museum
Police Museum
Portico Library
Playhouse Theatre
Redfern Building
Reform Club
Rose Hill
Royal Eye Hospital
Rylands Building
Sackville Street Building
Sharston Hall
Ship Canal House
Slade Hall
Smithfield Market Hall
St Anselm Hall
Saint Mary's Hospital
St Michael's
Strangeways
Sunlight House
Theatre Royal
Toast Rack
The Towers
Transport Museum
Urbis
Uttley House
Victoria Baths
Whitworth Art Gallery
Whitworth Building
Wythenshawe Bus Garage
Wythenshawe Hall
Mills and warehouses
107 Piccadilly
1830 warehouse, Liverpool Road railway station
Albion Mill
Asia House
Beehive Mill
Bridgewater House
Brownsfield Mill
Brunswick Mill
Canada House
Chorlton New Mills
Churchgate House
Dale Street Warehouse
Havelock Mills
India House
Jackson's Warehouse
Lancaster House
McConnel & Kennedy Mills
Murrays' Mills
Old Mill
Piccadilly Mill
Royal Mill
Shudehill Mill
Watts Warehouse
Religious(Grade I or II* listed)
British Muslim Heritage Centre
Brookfield Church
Castlefield Chapel
Christ Church
Cross Street Chapel
Holy Name of Jesus
Edgar Wood Centre
Gorton Monastery
Holy Trinity Platt Church
The Hidden Gem (Church of St Mary)
Jewish Museum
Manchester Cathedral
Manchester Reform Synagogue
St Ann's
St Chrysostom's Church
Church of St Cross
St George
St James
St John
St Mary (Hulme)
Church of St Michael
St Nicholas
St Peter
Upper Brook Street Chapel
St Wilfrid
Transportation
Manchester Airport
Airport station
Deansgate station
Piccadilly station
Victoria station
Oxford Road station
Piccadilly bus station
Shudehill Interchange
Entertainment
O2 Apollo
Arndale Centre
Bridgewater Hall
Castlefield Bowl
Central
Co-op Live
Contact Theatre
Cornerhouse
The Factory
Great Northern Warehouse
HOME
Palace Theatre
Parrs Wood Entertainment Centre
Opera House
The Printworks
Manchester Arena
Manchester Academy
O2 Ritz
Royal Exchange Theatre
Victoria Warehouse
Sports venues
Aquatics Centre
Belle Vue Stadium
Broadhurst Park
National Cycling Centre (BMX Arena, Velodrome)
Etihad Campus
City of Manchester Stadium
Manchester City Academy Stadium
Manchester Regional Arena
National Speedway Stadium
National Squash Centre
Memorials and sculptures
Alan Turing Memorial
Albert Memorial
B of the Bang
The Glade of Light
Cenotaph
Rise up, Women (Emmeline Pankhurst statue)
Peacock Mausoleum
Victory Over Blindness
Bridges
Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Corporation Street Bridge
Hulme Arch Bridge
Irwell Railway bridge
Palatine Bridge
Store Street Aqueduct
Trinity Bridge
Victoria Bridge

Architecture
Castles
Churches
Grade I listed
Grade II* listed
Grade II listed
Mills
Monuments
Tallest
Warehouses
Italics denote building under construction


Authority control databases InternationalISNINationalUnited StatesIsrael




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_and_Industry_Museum&oldid=1278569590"
Categories: Museums in ManchesterEuropean Route of Industrial Heritage Anchor PointsMuseums sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and SportHistory museums in Greater ManchesterScience museums in EnglandTechnology museums in the United KingdomIndustry museums in EnglandTransport museums in England1983 establishments in EnglandScience Museum GroupMuseums established in 1983Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlasArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from August 2015Use British English from August 2015Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2025All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 06:41 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Science and Industry Museum




























7 languages


Add topic
















