https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_appliance




Small appliance - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Uses








2
Types and examples








3
Prices








4
Powering








5
Safety








6
Designations and regulations








7
See also








8
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Small appliance



5 languages




العربيةΕλληνικάفارسیSuomi中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Portable or semi-portable machine in use to accomplish household task
The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
For broader coverage of this topic, see Home appliance.
Small appliances in a kitchen: a food processor, a waffle iron, a coffee maker, and an electric kettle
Glowing filaments of a modern 2-slice toaster
A small domestic appliance, also known as a small electric appliance or minor appliance or simply a small appliance, small domestic or  small electric,[1] is a portable or semi-portable machine, generally used on table-tops, counter-tops or other platforms, to accomplish a household task. Examples include microwave ovens, kettles, toasters, humidifiers, food processors and coffeemakers. They contrast with major appliances (known as "white goods" in the UK), such as the refrigerators and washing machines, which cannot be easily moved and are generally placed on the floor.  Small appliances also contrast with consumer electronics (British "brown goods") which are for leisure and entertainment rather than purely practical tasks.[2]


Uses[edit]
Some small appliances perform the same or similar function as their larger counterparts. For example, a toaster oven is a small appliance that performs a similar function as an oven. Small appliances often have a home version and a commercial version, for example waffle irons, food processors, and blenders are small household appliances. A food processor will perform the tasks of chopper, slicer, mixer as well as juicer. Instead of buying multiple small appliances, you can buy a single food processor. The commercial, or industrial, version is designed to be used nearly continuously in a restaurant or other similar setting. Commercial appliances are typically connected to a more powerful electrical outlet, are larger and stronger, have more user-serviceable parts, and cost significantly more. These commercial versions are capable of performing heavy tasks in one go.

Types and examples[edit]
An electric blender
Small appliances include those used for :

Beverage-making, such as electric kettles, coffeemakers or iced tea-makers
Cleaning, such as vacuum cleaner
Cooking, such as on a hot plate or with a microwave oven
Lighting, using light fixtures
Thermal comfort, such as an electric heater or fan
Many small appliances perform a combination of the above processes such as mixing, heating by a bread machine

Prices[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Small appliances can be very inexpensive, such as an electric can opener, hot pot, toaster, or coffee maker which may cost only a few U.S. dollars, or very expensive, such as an elaborate espresso maker, which may cost several thousand U.S. dollars. Most homes in developed economies contain several cheaper home appliances, with perhaps a few more expensive appliances, such as a high-end microwave oven or mixer. A small appliances like chopper, juicer, grinder and mixer may cost you few dollars. Instead of buying separate units the food processor will be less expensive. Sometime these kind of smart appliances saves money as well as the space.

Powering[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Many small appliances are powered by electricity. The appliance may use a permanently attached cord that is plugged into a wall outlet or a detachable cord. The appliance may have a cord storage feature. A few hand-held appliances use batteries, which may be disposable or rechargeable. Some appliances consist of an electrical motor upon which is mounted various attachments so as to constitute several individual appliances, such as a blender, a food processor, or a juicer. Many stand mixers, while functioning primarily as a mixer, have attachments that can perform additional functions.
A few gasoline and gas-powered appliances exist for use in situations where electricity is not expected to be available, but these are typically larger and not as portable as most small appliances. Items that perform the same function as small appliances but are hand-powered are generally referred to as tools or gadgets, for example a hand cranked egg beater, a grater, a mandoline, or a hand-powered meat grinder.

Safety[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Small appliances which are defective or improperly used or maintained may cause house fires and other property damage, or may harbor bacteria if not properly cleaned. It is important that users read the instructions carefully and that appliances that use a grounded cord be attached to a grounded outlet. Because of the risk of fire, some appliances have a short detachable cord that is connected to the appliance magnetically. If the appliance is moved further than the cord length from the wall, the cord will detach from the appliance.

Designations and regulations[edit]
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2015)
Designations and regulations of "small appliances" vary by country and are not simply determined by physical sizes. For instance, United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations mandate that small appliances must meet two standards:[3]
[4]

Completely manufactured, charged, and sealed in a factory
Contains five pounds or less of refrigerant
The designations and regulations of "small appliances" are very important in order to assure the safety of the public. Here are some rules and regulations for small appliances:[5]

Altering the design of certified recovered small appliances in a way that would affect the equipment's ability to meet the certification standards is strictly prohibited
The equipment must meet the minimum requirements for certification
See also[edit]

Appliance (disambiguation)
Domestic technology
List of cooking appliances
List of home appliances
Standby power
Yellow goods (retail classification)

References[edit]


^ Small Electrics | Big Lots

^ Baumann, Ted (1995). An industrial strategy for the household electrical durables industry. UCT Press. p. vi. ISBN 9780799215786.

^ Paluca, Kleia. "Understanding Small Appliance Standards and Regulations". Appliance Authority. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 16 November 2015.

^ "Trung Tâm Sửa Điều Hòa Uy Tín Tại Nhà Hà Nội Giá Tốt Nhất 2022". Trung Tâm Sửa Điều Hòa Uy Tín Tại Nhà Hà Nội Giá Tốt Nhất 2022.

^ "Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (eCFR)". Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (eCFR). Retrieved 2021-02-07.


vteElectronicsBranches
Analogue electronics
Digital electronics
Electronic engineering
Instrumentation
Microelectronics
Optoelectronics
Power electronics
Printed electronics
Semiconductor
Schematic capture
Thermal management
Advancedtopics
2020s in computing
Atomtronics
Bioelectronics
List of emerging electronics
Failure of electronic components
Flexible electronics
Low-power electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectronics
Organic electronics
Photonics
Piezotronics
Quantum electronics
Spintronics
Electronicequipment
Air conditioner
Central heating
Clothes dryer
Computer/Notebook
Camera
Dishwasher
Freezer
Home robot
Home cinema
Home theater PC
Information technology
Cooker
Microwave oven
Mobile phone
Networking hardware
Portable media player
Radio
Refrigerator
Robotic vacuum cleaner
Tablet
Telephone
Television
Water heater
Video game console
Washing machine
Applications
Audio equipment
Automotive electronics
Avionics
Control system
Data acquisition
e-book
e-health
Electromagnetic warfare
Electronics industry
Embedded system
Home appliance
Home automation
Integrated circuit
Home appliance
Consumer electronics
Major appliance
Small appliance
Marine electronics
Microwave technology
Military electronics
Multimedia
Nuclear electronics
Open-source hardware
Radar and Radio navigation
Radio electronics
Terahertz technology
Wired and Wireless Communications





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Small_appliance&oldid=1281648405"
Category: Home appliancesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles with limited geographic scope from March 2011United States-centricArticles needing additional references from September 2019All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from November 2015All articles to be expanded






 This page was last edited on 21 March 2025, at 17:00 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Small appliance




























5 languages


Add topic
















