https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_BSD_operating_systems




List of BSD operating systems - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
FreeBSD-based




Toggle FreeBSD-based subsection





1.1
Active








1.2
Discontinued








1.3
DragonFly BSD-based










2
NetBSD-based








3
OpenBSD-based








4
Historic BSD








5
BSD-like Systems








6
See also








7
References








8
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







List of BSD operating systems



3 languages




EspañolNederlandsРусский

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




This article contains dynamic lists that may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources.
There are a number of Unix-like operating systems under active development, descended from the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) series of UNIX variants developed (originally by Bill Joy) at the University of California, Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
Since the early 2000s[update], there are four major BSD operating systems–FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD and DragonFly BSD, and an increasing number of other OSs forked from these, that add or remove certain features; however, most of them remain largely compatible with their originating OS—and so are not really forks of them. This is a list of those that have been active since 2014, and their websites.


FreeBSD-based[edit]
FreeBSD is a free Unix-like operating system descended from AT&T UNIX via the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD). FreeBSD currently has more than 200 active developers and thousands of contributors. Other notable derivatives include DragonFly BSD, which was forked from FreeBSD 4.8, and Apple Inc.'s macOS, with its Darwin base including a large amount of code derived from FreeBSD.

Active[edit]


Name
Description


ClonOS[1]

Offers a complete web UI for easily controlling, deploying and managing FreeBSD jails, containers and Bhyve/Xen hypervisor virtual environments.


DragonFly BSD

Originally forked from FreeBSD 4.8, now developed in a different direction


TrueNAS

Previously known as FreeNAS.


GhostBSD

GhostBSD is a FreeBSD OS distro oriented for desktops and laptops. Its goal is to combine the stability and security of FreeBSD with OpenRC, OS packages and Mate graphical user interface. GhostBSD comes as livecd for users to test before installing.


HardenedBSD

HardenedBSD is a security-enhanced fork of FreeBSD. The HardenedBSD Project is implementing many exploit mitigation and security technologies on top of FreeBSD.


helloSystem

A desktop system for creators that focuses on simplicity, elegance, and usability.


Junos OS

For Juniper routers


MidnightBSD

Midnight BSD forked away from FreeBSD 6.1 Beta


XigmaNAS

Previously known as NAS4Free, is a network-attached storage (NAS) server software. It is a continuation of the original FreeNAS code.


NomadBSD

Persistent live system for USB flash drives


OPNsense

OPNsense is a FreeBSD-based firewall tailored for use as a firewall and router that was forked from pfSense.


pfSense

pfSense is a FreeBSD-based firewall tailored for use as a firewall and router.


CellOS

The PlayStation 3 operating system


Orbis OS

The PlayStation 4 operating system


Zrouter

FreeBSD based firmware for embedded devices


ULBSD

ULBSD is a Unix-like, desktop-oriented operating system based on FreeBSD. It aims to be easy to install and ready-to-use immediately by providing pre-installed graphical KDE5 user desktop environment.


ravynOS (formerly airyxOS)

ravynOS is a FreeBSD-based OS aimed at providing "the finesse of macOS".

Discontinued[edit]


Name
Description


AskoziaPBX

Discontinued[2]


BSDBox

Discontinued


BSDeviant

Discontinued


BSDLive

Discontinued


Bzerk CD

Discontinued


ClosedBSD

Discontinued


DesktopBSD

Discontinued.[2] Was a desktop-oriented FreeBSD variant using K Desktop Environment 3.5.


EclipseBSD

Discontinued


Evoke

Discontinued. Formerly DamnSmallBSD; a small live FreeBSD environment geared toward developers and system administrators.[3]


FenestrOS BSD

Discontinued


FreeBSDLive

Discontinued


FreeBSD LiveCD

Discontinued


FreeSBIE

Discontinued


Frenzy Live CD

Discontinued. A "portable system administrator toolkit". It generally contains software for hardware tests, file system check, security check and network setup and analysis.


FuryBSD[4]

Discontinued in 2020. Paid homage to desktop BSD projects of the past like PC-BSD and TrueOS with its graphical interface and adds additional tools like a live, hybrid USB / DVD image.


Debian GNU/kFreeBSD

Discontinued[5]


Ging

Discontinued


Gentoo/FreeBSD

Discontinued. Gentoo/*BSD was a subproject to port Gentoo features such as Portage to the FreeBSD operating system.


GuLIC-BSD

Discontinued


HamFreeSBIE

Discontinued


HeX

Discontinued


IronPort AsyncOS

Discontinued. security appliances


miniBSD

Discontinued


m0n0wall

Discontinued.[6] Successor is OPNsense. m0n0wall was an embedded firewall distribution of FreeBSD, one of the BSD operating system descendants. It provided a small image which can be put on Compact Flash cards as well as on CDROMs and hard disks. It ran on a number of embedded platforms and generic PCs.


NetBoz

Discontinued


Nokia IPSO

Discontinued. Nokia IP security appliances


PacBSD[7]

Discontinued. A lightweight operating system that aimed to bring the flexibility and philosophy of Arch Linux to BSD-based operating systems. The Project has been inactive since 2017.


Paxym

Discontinued. FreeBSD for Cavium Networks OCTEON


PicoBSD

Discontinued


RelaxBSD

Discontinued


RoFreeSBIE

Discontinued


Snarl

Discontinued


The Dark Star

Discontinued


TheWall

Discontinued


ThinBSD

Discontinued


Triance OS

Discontinued


TrueBSD

Discontinued


TrueOS

Discontinued. TrueOS (formerly PC/BSD) was a Unix-like, desktop-oriented operating system based on FreeBSD based on ZFS boot-environments, Lumina (desktop environment), and the sysadm administration framework; reinvented as Trident OS on top of Void Linux, retained many BSD aesthetics.


TrustedBSD

Discontinued. Many of its extensions were integrated into FreeBSD. Only activity on trustedbsd-discuss mailing list is spam (as of 2020-12-22).


WarBSD

Discontinued


WiBSD

Discontinued


WiFiBSD

Discontinued


XORP

Discontinued


BSDTahoe

BSD 4.3 Tahoe for VAX

DragonFly BSD-based[edit]


Name
Description


Gentoo/DragonFlyBSD

Gentoo/*BSD subproject to port Gentoo features such as Portage to the DragonFly BSD operating system


FireFly BSD[8]

Was a DragonFly based distribution.

NetBSD-based[edit]
NetBSD is a freely redistributable, open source version of the Unix-derivative Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) computer operating system. It was the second open source BSD descendant to be formally released, after 386BSD, and continues to be actively developed. Noted for its portability and quality of design and implementation, it is often used in embedded systems and as a starting point for the porting of other operating systems to new computer architectures.



Name
Description


BlackBSD[9]

Discontinued. BlackBSD was a NetBSD-based Live CD, with security tools on it and fluxbox as a window manager


EdgeBSD[10]

Discontinued. NetBSD fork with main goal to be more modern in some aspects than NetBSD itself. Its most noticeable differences were back-committed to the main project.


fdgw[11][12]

fdgw is a tool kit to build a minimal NetBSD bootable disk, with a primary focus on routers.


Force10 Networks FTOS[13]

Powerful and robust operating system that runs on Force10 TeraScale E-Series switches/routers.


SEIL/SMFv2[14][15]

The software framework used by  IIJ's SEIL/X CPE routers, built on NetBSD.


g4u[16]

NetBSD-based bootfloppy/CD-ROM that allows easy cloning of PC harddisks.


Debian GNU/NetBSD

Debian GNU/NetBSD was a project to combine Debian with the kernel of NetBSD. It was abandoned in 2002 and has not seen active maintenance ever since.


Gentoo/NetBSD

Discontinued. Gentoo/*BSD was a subproject to port Gentoo features such as Portage to the NetBSD operating system.


irBSD[17]

Discontinued. irBSD was a digital forensics kit based on the NetBSD operating system, designed for cryptography, penetration testing, data recovery, reverse engineering, privacy protection and other security tasks.


Jibbed[18]

Live CD based on NetBSD


NetBSD/i386 Firewall[19]

Inactive. A free firewall solution based on NetBSD and targeting i386 devices.


OS108[20]

OS108 is a desktop-oriented operating system based on NetBSD.


PolyBSD / pocketSAN[21]

Multipurpose framework for building embedded systems based on NetBSD.


SEOS[22]

The operating system for the Ericsson SmartEdge router series


smolBSD[23]

System creation tool based on NetBSD, primarily aimed at building modern, lightweight, fast micro VMs.

OpenBSD-based[edit]
OpenBSD is a Unix-like computer operating system descended from Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD), a Unix derivative developed at the University of California, Berkeley. It was forked from NetBSD in 1995. OpenBSD includes a number of security features absent or optional in other operating systems and has a tradition of developers auditing the source code for software bugs and security problems.



Name
Description


ÆrieBSD

OpenBSD fork which tends to be free from GPL-licensed software.[24]


adJ

Distribution of OpenBSD for Spanish speakers,[25] since 2005 new versions are released around 3 months after OpenBSD's releases, source in GitHub,[26] to learn how to install there is a challenge  with badge on P2PU[27]


Anonym.OS

Discontinued.


Bitrig[28]

Discontinued.[29] Was an OpenBSD fork with main goal to be more modern in some aspects than OpenBSD.


BowlFish

Customized OpenBSD installation script for embedded systems, intended to make OpenBSD fit into small media like compact flash cards.


BSDanywhere

Live CD featuring the Enlightenment DR17 window manager


ComixWall

A firewall with UTM features. Discontinued 2009 in place for UTMFW[30]


ekkoBSD

ekkoBSD was a Unix-like operating system based on OpenBSD 3.3, also incorporating code from other BSD-like operating systems. Its focus was on security and easy administration.


EmBSD




FabBSD

OpenBSD fork with main application in CNC field. It is almost inactive.


FuguIta

Providing both LiveDVD and LiveUSB for i386/amd64/arm64. Highly customizable by user. Tracking errata on OpenBSD-stable.


Gentoo/OpenBSD

Gentoo/*BSD was a subproject to port Gentoo features such as Portage to the OpenBSD operating system.


MarBSD

LiveCD of OpenBSD


LibertyBSD

Discounted. Fork of OpenBSD with all non-free binaries removed.


MicroBSD

Fork of the UNIX-like BSD operating system descendant OpenBSD 3.0, begun in July 2002. The project's objective to produce a free and fully secure, complete system, but with a small footprint.


MirOS BSD

Core system based mostly on OpenBSD and some NetBSD code for 32-bit i386 and SPARC, updated via infrequent snapshots and by following "current". Additional packages via MirPorts and pkgsrc are no longer updated.


OliveBSD[31]

Was a live CD originally based on OpenBSD 3.8


PsygNAT

Firewall and NAT router tool


Quetzal[32]

Was a live DVD/CD system, based on OpenBSD


SONaFR

SONaFR is a small system with router/NAT/firewalling capabilities that fits on a single floppy.


UTMFW

Successor of ComixWall, a firewall with UTM features


LiveUSB OpenBSD

LiveUSB OpenBSD is a project started around 2009 for creating OpenBSD based bootable USB flash images. There are 3 variants, one with Gnome, a minimal text only version and an XFCE desktop image.


LiveCD OpenBSD

LiveCD OpenBSD is sister project of LiveUSB-OpenBSD and this gives users a Live CD/DVD bootable distribution where the user gets to experience OpenBSD without installing to disk. There are 3 flavors, one with XFCE, one with MATE desktop and one with KDE.


Historic BSD[edit]
Main article: Berkeley Software Distribution
BSD was originally derived from Unix, using the complete source code for Sixth Edition Unix for the PDP-11 from Bell Labs as a starting point for the First Berkeley Software Distribution, or 1BSD. A series of updated versions for the PDP-11 followed (the 2.xBSD releases). A 32-bit version for the VAX platform was released as 3BSD, and the 4.xBSD series added many new features, including TCP/IP networking.
For many years, the primary developer and project leader was Bill Joy, who was a graduate student at the time; funding for this project was provided by DARPA.  DARPA was interested in obtaining a programming platform and programmer's interface which would provide a robust, general purpose, time-sharing computing platform which would not become obsolete every time computing hardware was or is replaced.  Such an operating system would allow US Department of Defense software, especially for intricate, long-term finance and logistics operations, to be quickly ported to new hardware as it became available.
As time went on, code was later ported both from and to Unix System III and still later Unix System V. Unix System V Revision 4 (SVR4), released circa 1992, contained much code which was ported from BSD version up to and including 4.3BSD.

BSD-like Systems[edit]
There are various operating systems, particularly GNU/Linux distributions that attempt to imitate the design of BSD, but do not use the code base of any BSD Operating System.



Name
Description


Void Linux

Void Linux is a Linux distribution created in 2008 by Juan Romero Pardines, a former developer of NetBSD. It uses its own independent package manager, XBPS. It also has elements inspired by NetBSD, such xbps-src, a source package management system inspired by pkgsrc, an adaption of NetBSD's wtf utility, and also uses runit as its init system instead of systemd.


CRUX

CRUX is a Linux distribution mainly targeted at expert computer users. It uses BSD-style initscripts and utilizes a ports system similar to a BSD-based operating system.


Chimera Linux

Chimera Linux is a Linux distribution that uses musl libc and core utilities based on FreeBSD.


Sabotage Linux[33]

Sabotage is an experimental Linux distribution based on musl libc and busybox. It uses NetBSD curses and has  a lightweight multithreaded package and build manager, named butch.

See also[edit]

Free and open-source software portal
Comparison of BSD operating systems
Commercial products based on FreeBSD
References[edit]


^ "Free Open-Source Hosting Platform ClonOS". Retrieved 28 September 2016.

^ a b "Updated: FBSD based Projects and Systems page". FreeBSD News. 2010-01-12. Archived from the original on 2013-12-12. Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "evoke - Formerly DamnSmallBSD - Google Project Hosting". Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "A Powerful, Portable, FreeBSD Desktop". Retrieved 6 July 2020.

^ Wiltshire, Jonathan (2014-11-09). "Release Team Sprint Results". debian-devel-announce (Mailing list).

^ m0w0wall discontinued 2014

^ "PacBSD : Homepage : A simple, lightweight distribution". Archbsd.net. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ "FireflyBSD - DragonFlyBSD". Archived from the original on September 8, 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ "BlackBSD Github repository". 18 May 2013. Retrieved 2025-02-09.

^ "The EdgeBSD Project: About EdgeBSD". Edgebsd.org. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ "fdgw is one floppy NetBSD". Ken'ichi Fukamachi - FML.ORG. Retrieved 8 February 2025.

^ "fdgw Github repository". 6 June 2017. Retrieved 8 February 2025.

^ "Dell Force10 Operating System". NetSolutionsWorks. Retrieved 8 February 2025.

^ "SMF developer site".

^ "SEIL/SMF Github page".

^ "g4u - Harddisk Image Cloning for PCs". Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "irBSD". PCLITE Official. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018.

^ "Jibbed: A live USB stick for NetBSD". Retrieved 2025-04-14.

^ "Welcome to the NetBSD/i386 Firewall Project". Retrieved 2025-02-09.

^ "A fast, open and Secure desktop Operating System based on NetBSD". 2020-11-13. Retrieved 2021-08-02.

^ "NetBSD on embedded devices - turning USB thumb-drives into VPNs". Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "RedBack Smartedge pcap format". Wireshark Wiki. Retrieved 2025-04-14.

^ "smolBSD: make your own BSD UNIX MicroVM". Retrieved 2025-01-06.

^ "AerieBSD". Archived from the original on 2015-05-02. Retrieved 2016-05-16.

^ "Novedades". Aprendiendo.pasosdejesus.org. Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "pasosdeJesus/adJ · GitHub". Github.com. Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "Reto: adJ como sistema operativo de escritorio" (in Spanish). P2PU. Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "Bitrig". Bitrig.org. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ "Faq 路 bitrig/bitrig Wiki 路 GitHub". Github.com. 2013-10-04. Retrieved 2014-02-16.

^ "ComixWall". Retrieved 2024-11-27.

^ DistroWatch. "DistroWatch.com: OliveBSD". Distrowatch.com. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ Micho Durdevich. "Quetzal::BSD Home Page". Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved 17 November 2014.

^ "Sabotage Linux". Retrieved 9 February 2025.


External links[edit]
helloSystem docs on GitHub
MiniOS - List of small OSes, with a section on BSD-based ones
- MaheshaBSD in the BSD Magazine[usurped]
vteBerkeley Software DistributionPeople
Bob Fabry
Keith Bostic
Marshall Kirk McKusick
Michael J. Karels
Bill Joy
Samuel Leffler
Jordan Hubbard
Theo de Raadt
Poul-Henning Kamp
Matthew Dillon
Ozalp Babaoglu
Lynne and William Jolitz
DerivativesActive
FreeBSD
GhostBSD
OpenBSD
NetBSD
DragonFly BSD
MidnightBSD
MirOS BSD
Junos OS
Darwin
macOS
iOS
audioOS
iPadOS
tvOS
visionOS
watchOS
bridgeOS
PS3/PS4/PS Vita operating system
Full list
Discontinued
386BSD
BSD/OS
SunOS
TrueOS
Ultrix
Companies
Sleepycat Software
Walnut Creek CDROM
Berkeley Software Design
iXsystems
Other topics
Comparison
History
Licensing
BSD Daemon
Lumina
Computer Systems Research Group

 Category
 Commons
 Quote





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_BSD_operating_systems&oldid=1287233761"
Categories: Berkeley Software DistributionLightweight Unix-like systemsLists of operating systemsUniversity of California, Berkeley-related listsHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataDynamic listsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2000All articles containing potentially dated statements






 This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 21:46 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







List of BSD operating systems




























3 languages


Add topic
















