https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crash_(computing)




Crash (computing) - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Application crashes




Toggle Application crashes subsection





1.1
Crash to desktop










2
Web server crashes








3
Operating system crashes




Toggle Operating system crashes subsection





3.1
Abnormal end










4
Security and privacy implications of crashes








5
Crash reproduction








6
See also








7
Notes








8
References








9
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Crash (computing)



24 languages




العربيةবাংলাDeutschEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתKiswahiliNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSuomiSvenskaУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Unexpected program exit due to an error
"System crash" redirects here and is not to be confused with System Crash (TV series).


This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Crash" computing – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
A kernel panic displayed on an iMac. This is the most common form of an operating system failure in Unix-like systems.
In computing, a crash, or system crash, occurs when a computer program such as a software application or an operating system stops functioning properly and exits. On some operating systems or individual applications, a crash reporting service will report the crash and any details relating to it (or give the user the option to do so), usually to the developer(s) of the application. If the program is a critical part of the operating system, the entire system may crash or hang, often resulting in a kernel panic or fatal system error.
Most crashes are the result of a software bug. Typical causes include accessing invalid memory addresses,[a] incorrect address values in the program counter, buffer overflow, overwriting a portion of the affected program code due to an earlier bug, executing invalid machine instructions (an illegal or unauthorized opcode), or triggering an unhandled exception. The original software bug that started this chain of events is typically considered to be the cause of the crash, which is discovered through the process of debugging. The original bug can be far removed from the code that actually triggered the crash.
In early personal computers, attempting to write data to hardware addresses outside the system's main memory could cause hardware damage. Some crashes are exploitable and let a malicious program or hacker execute arbitrary code, allowing the replication of viruses or the acquisition of data which would normally be inaccessible.


Application crashes[edit]
A display at Frankfurt Airport running a program under Windows XP that has crashed due to a memory read access violation
An application typically crashes when it performs an operation that is not allowed by the operating system. The operating system then triggers an exception or signal in the application. Unix applications traditionally responded to the signal by dumping core. Most Windows and Unix GUI applications respond by displaying a dialogue box (such as the one shown in the accompanying image on the right) with the option to attach a debugger if one is installed. Some applications attempt to recover from the error and continue running instead of exiting.
An application can also contain code to crash[b] after detecting a severe error.
Typical errors that result in application crashes include:

attempting to read or write memory that is not allocated for reading or writing by that application (e.g., segmentation fault, x86-specific general protection fault)
attempting to execute privileged or invalid instructions
attempting to perform I/O operations on hardware devices to which it does not have permission to access
passing invalid arguments to system calls
attempting to access other system resources to which the application does not have permission to access
attempting to execute machine instructions with bad arguments (depending on CPU architecture): divide by zero, operations on denormal number or NaN (not a number) values, memory access to unaligned addresses, etc.
Crash to desktop[edit]
A "crash to desktop" (CTD) is said to occur when a program (commonly a video game) unexpectedly quits, abruptly taking the user back to the desktop. Usually, the term is applied only to crashes where no error is displayed, hence all the user sees as a result of the crash is the desktop. Many times there is no apparent action that causes a crash to desktop. During normal function, the program may freeze for a shorter period of time, and then close by itself. Also during normal function, the program may become a black screen and repeatedly play the last few seconds of sound (depending on the size of the audio buffer) that was being played before it crashes to desktop. Other times it may appear to be triggered by a certain action, such as loading an area.
CTD bugs are considered particularly problematic for users. Since they frequently display no error message, it can be very difficult to track down the source of the problem, especially if the times they occur and the actions taking place right before the crash do not appear to have any pattern or common ground. One way to track down the source of the problem for games is to run them in windowed-mode. Certain operating system versions may feature one or more tools to help track down causes of CTD problems.
Some computer programs such as StepMania and BBC's Bamzooki also crash to desktop if in full-screen, but display the error in a separate window when the user has returned to the desktop.

Web server crashes[edit]
The software running the web server behind a website may crash, rendering it inaccessible entirely or providing only an error message instead of normal content.
For example, if a site is using an SQL database (such as MySQL) for a script (such as PHP) and that SQL database server crashes, then PHP will display a connection error.

Operating system crashes[edit]
A Blue screen of death as displayed in Windows XP, Vista, and 7
A kernel panic as displayed in OS X Mountain Lion
An operating system crash commonly occurs when a hardware exception occurs that cannot be handled. Operating system crashes can also occur when internal sanity-checking logic within the operating system detects that the operating system has lost its internal self-consistency.
Modern multi-tasking operating systems, such as Linux, and macOS, usually remain unharmed when an application program crashes.
Some operating systems, e.g., z/OS, have facilities for Reliability, availability and serviceability (RAS) and the OS can recover from the crash of a critical component, whether due to hardware failure, e.g., uncorrectable ECC error, or to software failure, e.g., a reference to an unassigned page.

Abnormal end[edit]
An Abnormal end or ABEND is an abnormal termination of software, or a program crash. Errors or crashes on the Novell NetWare network operating system are usually called ABENDs. Communities of NetWare administrators sprang up around the Internet, such as abend.org.
This usage derives from the ABEND macro on IBM OS/360, ..., z/OS operating systems. Usually capitalized, but may appear as "abend". Some common ABEND codes are System ABEND 0C7 (data exception) and System ABEND 0CB (division by zero).[1][2][3] Abends can be "soft" (allowing automatic recovery) or "hard" (terminating the activity).[4] The term is jocularly claimed to be derived from the German word "Abend" meaning "evening".[5]

Security and privacy implications of crashes[edit]
Depending on the application, the crash may contain the user's sensitive and private information.[6] Moreover, many software bugs which cause crashes are also exploitable for arbitrary code execution and other types of privilege escalation.[7][8] For example, a stack buffer overflow can overwrite the return address of a subroutine with an invalid value, which will cause, e.g., a segmentation fault, when the subroutine returns. However, if an exploit overwrites the return address with a valid value, the code in that address will be executed.

Crash reproduction[edit]
When crashes are collected in the field using a crash reporter, the next step for developers is to be able to reproduce them locally. For this, several techniques exist:
STAR uses symbolic execution,[9]
EvoCrash performs evolutionary search.[10]

See also[edit]

Copy protection
Crash-only software
Data loss
Guru Meditation
Memory corruption
Memory protection
Page fault
Reboot
Safe mode
Single-event upset
Storage violation
SIGILL
SystemRescue
Undefined behavior

Notes[edit]


^ Types of invalid addresses include:
Invalid real address
Invalid segment number
Invalid page number
Address not on correct boundary (alignment error)

^ In OS/360 and successors the application normally uses an ABEND macro with a user completion code.


References[edit]


^ "ABEND" (PDF). OS Release 21 – System/360 Operating System – Supervisor Services and Macro Instructions (PDF) (Eighth ed.). IBM. September 1974. pp. 97–99. GC28-6646-7. Retrieved 8 July 2023.

^ "0Cx – z/OS MVS System Codes". IBM.

^ List of ABEND codes Archived 2018-09-16 at the Wayback Machine on madisoncollege.edu

^ Parziale, Lydia (2008). z/VM and Linux Operations for z/OS System Programmers. IBM Redbooks. ISBN 9780738431598. page 352

^ "Abend" Archived 29 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine on dictionary.die.net

^ Satvat, Kiavash; Saxena, Nitesh (2018). "Crashing Privacy: An Autopsy of a Web Browser's Leaked Crash Reports". arXiv:1808.01718 [cs.CR].

^ "Analyze Crashes to Find Security Vulnerabilities in Your Apps". Msdn.microsoft.com. 26 April 2007. Archived from the original on 11 December 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2014.

^ "Jesse Ruderman » Memory safety bugs in C++ code". Squarefree.com. 1 November 2006. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2014.

^ Chen, Ning; Kim, Sunghun (2015). "STAR: Stack Trace Based Automatic Crash Reproduction via Symbolic Execution". IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering. 41 (2): 198–220. doi:10.1109/TSE.2014.2363469. ISSN 0098-5589. S2CID 6299263.

^ Soltani, Mozhan; Panichella, Annibale; van Deursen, Arie (2017). "A Guided Genetic Algorithm for Automated Crash Reproduction". 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). pp. 209–220. doi:10.1109/ICSE.2017.27. ISBN 978-1-5386-3868-2. S2CID 199514177. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2020.


External links[edit]
Picking Up The Pieces After A Computer Crash




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crash_(computing)&oldid=1284870271"
Categories: Computer jargonComputer errorsSoftware anomaliesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from December 2024Articles needing additional references from December 2013All articles needing additional references






 This page was last edited on 10 April 2025, at 06:49 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Crash (computing)




























24 languages


Add topic
















