https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_publishing




Desktop publishing - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Terminology








3
Comparisons




Toggle Comparisons subsection





3.1
With word processing








3.2
With other digital layout software








3.3
With web design










4
Software








5
File formats








6
See also








7
References




Toggle References subsection





7.1
Sources




















Toggle the table of contents







Desktop publishing



40 languages




العربيةবাংলাБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançaisFryskGaeilge한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתҚазақшаMagyarമലയാളംमराठीBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaTagalogTürkçeУкраїнськаاردو中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Page layout using a personal computer
Not to be confused with Electronic publishing.
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Desktop publishing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Desktop publishing (DTP) is the creation of documents using dedicated software on a personal ("desktop") computer. It was first used almost exclusively for print publications, but now it also assists in the creation of various forms of online content.[1] Desktop publishing software can generate page layouts and produce text and image content comparable to the simpler forms of traditional typography and printing. This technology allows individuals, businesses, and other organizations to self-publish a wide variety of content, from menus to magazines to books, without the expense of commercial printing.[2]
Desktop publishing often requires the use of a personal computer and WYSIWYG page layout software to create documents for either large-scale publishing or small-scale local printing and distribution –  although non-WYSIWYG systems such as TeX and LaTeX are also used, especially in scientific publishing. Originally, desktop publishing methods provided more control over design, layout, and typography than word processing software but the latter has evolved to include most, if not all, capabilities previously available only with dedicated desktop publishing software.[3]
The same DTP skills and software used for common paper and book publishing are sometimes used to create graphics for point of sale displays, presentations, infographics, brochures, business cards, promotional items, trade show exhibits, retail package designs and outdoor signs.


History[edit]
Desktop publishing was first developed at Xerox PARC in the 1970s.[4][5] A contradictory claim states that desktop publishing began in 1983 with a program developed by James Davise at a community newspaper in Philadelphia.[6] The program Type Processor One ran on a PC using a graphics card for a WYSIWYG display and was offered commercially by Best Info in 1984.[7] Desktop typesetting with only limited page makeup facilities[citation needed] arrived in 1978–1979 with the introduction of TeX, and was extended in 1985 with the introduction of LaTeX. 
The desktop publishing market took off in 1985 with the introduction in January of the Apple LaserWriter laser printer for the year-old Apple Macintosh personal computer.[8][9] 
This momentum was kept up with the release that July of PageMaker software from Aldus, which rapidly became the standard software application for desktop publishing.[10] With its advanced layout features, PageMaker immediately relegated word processors like Microsoft Word to the composition and editing of purely textual documents.[11] Word did not begin to acquire desktop publishing features until a decade later, and by 2003, it was regarded only as "good" and not "great" at desktop publishing tasks.[12]  The term "desktop publishing" is attributed to Aldus founder Paul Brainerd, who sought a marketing catchphrase to describe the small size and relative affordability of this suite of products, in contrast to the expensive commercial phototypesetting equipment of the day.[13]
Before the advent of desktop publishing, the only option available to most people for producing typed documents (as opposed to handwritten documents) was a typewriter, which offered only a handful of typefaces (usually fixed-width) and one or two font sizes. Indeed, one popular desktop publishing book was titled The Mac is Not a Typewriter, and it had to actually explain how a Mac could do so much more than a typewriter.[14] The ability to create WYSIWYG page layouts on screen and then print pages containing text and graphical elements at 300 dpi resolution was a major development for the personal computer industry. The ability to do all this with industry standards like PostScript also radically changed the traditional publishing industry, which at the time was accustomed to buying end-to-end turnkey solutions for digital typesetting which came with their own proprietary hardware workstations.[15] Newspapers and other print publications began to transition to DTP-based programs from older layout systems such as Atex and other programs in the early 1980s.
Desktop publishing was still in its early stage in the early 1980s. Users of the PageMaker/LaserWriter/Macintosh 512K system endured frequent software crashes,[16] Mac's low-resolution 512x342 1-bit monochrome screen, the inability to control letter spacing, kerning, and other typographic features, and the discrepancies between screen display and printed output. However, it was an unheard-of combination at the time, and was received with considerable acclaim.[10]
Behind the scenes, technologies developed by Adobe Systems set the foundation for professional desktop publishing applications. The LaserWriter and LaserWriter Plus printers included scalable Adobe PostScript fonts built into their ROM memory. The LaserWriter's PostScript capability allowed publication designers to proof files on a local printer, then print the same file at DTP service bureaus using optical resolution 600+ ppi PostScript printers such as those from Linotronic. 
Later, the Macintosh II was released, which was considerably more suitable for desktop publishing due to its greater expandability, support for large color multi-monitor displays, and its SCSI storage interface (which allowed hard drives to be attached to the system). Macintosh-based systems continued to dominate the market into 1986, when the GEM-based Ventura Publisher was introduced for MS-DOS computers. PageMaker's pasteboard metaphor closely simulated the process of creating layouts manually, but Ventura Publisher automated the layout process through its use of tags and style sheets and automatically generated indices and other body matter. This made it particularly suitable for the creation of manuals and other long-format documents.
Desktop publishing moved into the home market in 1986 with Professional Page for the Amiga, Publishing Partner (now PageStream) for the Atari ST, GST's Timeworks Publisher on the PC and Atari ST, and Calamus for the Atari TT030. Software was published even for 8-bit computers like the Apple II and Commodore 64: Home Publisher, The Newsroom, and geoPublish. 
During its early years, desktop publishing acquired a bad reputation as a result of untrained users who created poorly organized, unprofessional-looking "ransom note effect" layouts.[11]  (Similar criticism was leveled again against early World Wide Web publishers a decade later.) However, some desktop publishers who mastered the programs were able to achieve near professional results. Desktop publishing skills were considered of primary importance in career advancement in the 1980s, but increased accessibility to more user-friendly DTP software has made DTP a secondary skill to art direction, graphic design, multimedia development, marketing communications, and administrative careers. DTP skill levels range from what may be learned in a couple of hours (e.g., learning how to put clip art in a word processor), to what's typically required in a college education. The discipline of DTP skills range from technical skills such as prepress production and programming, to creative skills such as communication design and graphic image development.
As of 2014[update], Apple computers remain dominant in publishing, even as the most popular software has changed from QuarkXPress – an estimated 95% market share in the 1990s – to Adobe InDesign. An Ars Technica writer said in an article: "I've heard about Windows-based publishing environments, but I've never actually seen one in my 20+ years in design and publishing".[17]

Terminology[edit]
There are two types of pages in desktop publishing: digital pages and virtual paper pages to be printed on physical paper pages. All computerized documents are technically digital, which are limited in size only by computer memory or computer data storage space. Virtual paper pages will ultimately be printed, and will therefore require paper parameters coinciding with standard physical paper sizes such as A4, letter paper and legal paper. Alternatively, the virtual paper page may require a custom size for later trimming. Some desktop publishing programs allow custom sizes designated for large format printing used in posters, billboards and trade show displays. A virtual page for printing has a predesignated size of virtual printing material and can be viewed on a monitor in WYSIWYG format. Each page for printing has trim sizes (edge of paper) and a printable area if bleed printing is not possible as is the case with most desktop printers. A web page is an example of a digital page that is not constrained by virtual paper parameters. Most digital pages may be dynamically re-sized, causing either the content to scale in size with the page or the content to re-flow.
Master pages are templates used to automatically copy or link elements and graphic design styles to some or all the pages of a multipage document. Linked elements can be modified without having to change each instance of an element on pages that use the same element. Master pages can also be used to apply graphic design styles to automatic page numbering. Cascading Style Sheets can provide the same global formatting functions for web pages that master pages provide for virtual paper pages. Page layout is the process by which the elements are laid on the page orderly, aesthetically and precisely. The main types of components to be laid out on a page include text, linked images (that can only be modified as an external source), and embedded images (that may be modified with the layout application software). Some embedded images are rendered in the application software, while others can be placed from an external source image file. Text may be keyed into the layout, placed, or – with database publishing applications – linked to an external source of text which allows multiple editors to develop a document at the same time.
Graphic design styles such as color, transparency and filters may also be applied to layout elements. Typography styles may be applied to text automatically with style sheets. Some layout programs include style sheets for images in addition to text. Graphic styles for images may include border shapes, colors, transparency, filters, and a parameter designating the way text flows around the object (also known as "wraparound" or "runaround").

Comparisons[edit]
With word processing[edit]
As desktop publishing software still provides extensive features necessary for print publishing, modern word processors now have publishing capabilities beyond those of many older DTP applications, blurring the line between word processing and desktop publishing. 
In the early 1980s, the graphical user interface was still in its embryonic stage and DTP software was in a class of its own when compared to the leading word processing applications of the time. Programs such as WordPerfect and WordStar were still mainly text-based and offered little in the way of page layout, other than perhaps margins and line spacing. On the other hand, word processing software was necessary for features like indexing and spell checking – features that are common in many applications today. As computers and operating systems became more powerful, versatile, and user-friendly in the 2010s, vendors have sought to provide users with a single application that can meet almost all their publication needs.

With other digital layout software[edit]
In earlier modern-day usage, DTP usually did not include digital tools such as TeX or troff, though both can easily be used on a modern desktop system, and are standard with many Unix-like operating systems and are readily available for other systems. The key difference between digital typesetting software and DTP software is that DTP software is generally interactive and "What you see [onscreen] is what you get" (WYSIWYG) in design, while other digital typesetting software, such as TeX, LaTeX and other variants, tend to operate in "batch mode", requiring the user to enter the processing program's markup language (e.g. HTML) without immediate visualization of the finished product. This kind of workflow is less user-friendly than WYSIWYG, but more suitable for conference proceedings and scholarly articles as well as corporate newsletters or other applications where consistent, automated layout is important. 
In the 2010s, interactive front-end components of TeX, such as TeXworks and LyX, have produced "what you see is what you mean" (WYSIWYM) hybrids of DTP and batch processing.[18] These hybrids are focused more on the semantics than the traditional DTP. Furthermore, with the advent of TeX editors the line between desktop publishing and markup-based typesetting is becoming increasingly narrow as well; a software which separates itself from the TeX world and develops itself in the direction of WYSIWYG markup-based typesetting is GNU TeXmacs.
On a different note, there is a slight overlap between desktop publishing and what is known as hypermedia publishing (e.g. web design, kiosk, CD-ROM). Many graphical HTML editors such as Microsoft FrontPage and Adobe Dreamweaver use a layout engine similar to that of a DTP program. However, many web designers still prefer to write HTML without the assistance of a WYSIWYG editor, for greater control and ability to fine-tune the appearance and functionality. Another reason that some Web designers write in HTML is that WYSIWYG editors often result in excessive lines of code, leading to code bloat that can make the pages hard to troubleshoot.

With web design[edit]
Desktop publishing produces primarily static print or digital media, the focus of this article. Similar skills, processes, and terminology are used in web design. Digital typography is the specialization of typography for desktop publishing. Web typography addresses typography and the use of fonts on the World Wide Web. Desktop style sheets apply formatting for print, Web Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) provide format control for web display. Web HTML font families map website font usage to the fonts available on the user's web browser or display device.

Software[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of desktop publishing software.
A wide variety of DTP applications and websites are available and are listed separately.

File formats[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of desktop publishing file formats.
The design industry standard is PDF. The older EPS format is also used and supported by most applications.

See also[edit]
Comparison of desktop publishing software
List of desktop publishing software
Document processor – Device or computer program used for writing and editing documentsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Camera-ready – Document technically ready to print
Desktop video – Pre-digital video editing on personal computers
DTP artist – Desktop publishing worker
E-book – Book published in digital formPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Digital publishing – Publishing and disseminating documents via electronic meansPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Web design – Creation and maintenance of websites
WYSIWYG – Acronym for "what you see is what you get" in computing
References[edit]


^ Bear, Jacci Howard. "What's Involved in Desktop Publishing?". Lifewire. Retrieved 2019-05-02.

^ Ruiter, Maurice M. de (1988-04-29). Advances in Computer Graphics III. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9783540187882.

^ Amanda Presley (2010-01-28). "What Distinguishes Desktop Publishing From Word Processing?". Bright Hub. Retrieved 2019-05-02.

^ Winograd, Terry (1996). Bringing Design to Software. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0201854916.

^ Jones, Steve (2002). Encyclopedia of New Media. SAGE Publications. p. 127. ISBN 978-0761923824.

^ "What You See Is Pretty Close to What You Get: New h&j, pagination program for IBM PC, " Seybold Report on Publishing Systems, 13(10), February 13, 1984, pp. 21-2.

^ "Type-X '85: Fulfilling the Promise of the PC, " Seybold Report on Publishing Systems, 15(2) pp. 4-5.

^ Casselman, Grace (November 2, 1992). "Desktop Publishing". Computer Dealer News. Vol. 8, no. 22 – via Gale Cengage Computer Database.

^ Pfiffner (2003), p. 45.

^ a b Pfiffner (2003), p. 54.

^ a b Angell, David; Kent, Peter (2003). Word 2003 Bible. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing. p. 411. ISBN 9780764555732. Retrieved 23 March 2024.

^ Angell, David; Kent, Peter (2003). Word 2003 Bible. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing. p. 412. ISBN 9780764555732. Retrieved 23 March 2024.

^ Pfiffner (2003), p. 49.

^ Williams, Robin (1990). The Mac is Not a Typewriter: A Style Manual for Creating Professional-level Type on Your Macintosh. Berkeley: Peachpit Press. p. 11. ISBN 9780938151319.

^ Pfiffner (2003), p. 55.

^ Thompson, Keith (8 June 1987). "Macintosh Layout Package Remarkably Fast, Powerful". InfoWorld. 9 (23): 51. Retrieved 2011-04-15.

^ Girard, Dave (2014-01-13). "How QuarkXPress became a mere afterthought in publishing". Ars Technica.

^ For more editors in the genre, see Comparison of TeX editors under the WYSIWYM / (partial) WYSIWYG editing style.


Sources[edit]

Pfiffner, Pamela (2003). Inside the Publishing Revolution: The Adobe Story. Berkeley: Peachpit Press. ISBN 0-321-11564-3.



Library resources about  Desktop publishing 

Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries


vteDesktop publishing softwareDesktop installed software
Adobe InDesign
Affinity Publisher
Apache OpenOffice
Collabora Office Draw and Collabora Office Writer
CorelDRAW
LibreOffice Draw and LibreOffice Writer
LyX
Microsoft Publisher
Pages
QuarkXPress
Scribus
The Print Shop
Online - cloud based software
Canva
Collabora Online Draw
Marq
See also
Electronic publishing
List of PDF software
Mobile publishing
Printing
Web design

Category
Comparison
List

vteTypographyPage
Canons of page construction
Column
Even working
Margin
Page numbering
Paper size
Pagination
Pull quote
Recto and verso
Intentionally blank page
Paragraph
Alignment
Leading
Line length
River
Runaround
Widows and orphans
runt
CharacterTypeface anatomy
Counter
Diacritics
Dingbat
Glyph
Ink trap
Ligature
Rotation
Subscript and superscript
Swash
Text figures
Tittle
Capitalization
All caps
Camel case
Initial
Letter case
Small caps
Snake case
Title case
Visual distinction
Blackboard bold
Bold
Color printing
Italics
Oblique
Underline
Whitespace
Horizontal aspects
Figure space
Kerning
Letter spacing
Pitch
Sentence spacing
Thin space
Word spacing
Vertical aspects
Ascender
Baseline
Body height
Cap height
Descender
Mean line
Overshoot
x-height
Typeface classificationsRoman type
Serif
Antiqua
Didone
slab serif
Sans-serif
Blackletter type
Fraktur
Rotunda
Schwabacher
Gaelic type
Insular
Uncial
Specialist
Record type
Display typeface
script
fat face
reverse-contrast
Punctuation (List)
Bullet
Dash
Hanging punctuation
Hyphen
minus sign
Interpunct
Space
Vertical bar
Typesetting
Etaoin shrdlu
Font
computer
monospaced
Font catalog
For position only
Letterpress
Lorem ipsum
Microprinting
Microtypography
Movable type
Pangram
Phototypesetting
Punchcutting
Reversing type
Sort
Type color
Type design
Typeface
list
Typographic units
Agate
Cicero
Em
En
Metric units
Pica
Point
traditional point-size names
Twip
Digital typography
Character encoding
Hinting
Text shaping
Rasterization
Typographic features
Web typography
Bézier curves
Desktop publishing
Typography in otherwriting systems
Arabic
Cyrillic
PT Fonts
East Asian
Thai
National Fonts
Related articles
Penmanship
Handwriting
Handwriting script
Calligraphy
Style guide
Type design
Type foundry
History of Western typography
Intellectual property protection of typefaces
Technical lettering
Vox-ATypI classification
Related template
Punctuation and other typographic symbols

 Category

Authority control databases: National GermanyUnited StatesJapanCzech RepublicIsrael




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Desktop_publishing&oldid=1285308196"
Categories: TypographyPublishingDigital typographyCommunication designDesktop publishing softwareTypesettingNews designHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from May 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from March 2023All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2023Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link






 This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 23:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Desktop publishing




























40 languages


Add topic
















