https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analogue_electronics




Analogue electronics - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Analogue signals








2
Inherent noise








3
Analogue vs digital electronics




Toggle Analogue vs digital electronics subsection





3.1
Noise








3.2
Precision








3.3
Design difficulty










4
Circuit classification








5
See also








6
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Analogue electronics



33 languages




العربيةCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어Հայերենहिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתҚазақшаMagyar日本語Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPolskiShqipСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்TürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikibooksWikiversityWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Electronic systems with a continuously variable signal



Analogue electronic components like this thermistor function with continuous signals, unlike digital electronics which have discrete signals, usually binary code
Analogue electronics (American English: analog electronics) are electronic systems with a continuously variable signal, in contrast to digital electronics where signals usually take only two levels. The term analogue describes the proportional relationship between a signal and a voltage or current that represents the signal. The word analogue is derived from the Greek word ανάλογος analogos meaning proportional.[1]


Analogue signals[edit]
An analogue signal uses some attribute of the medium to convey the signal's information. For example, an aneroid barometer uses the angular position of a needle on top of a contracting and expanding box as the signal to convey the information of changes in atmospheric pressure.[2] Electrical signals may represent information by changing their voltage, current, frequency, or total charge. Information is converted from some other physical form (such as sound, light, temperature, pressure, position) to an electrical signal by a transducer which converts one type of energy into another (e.g. a microphone).[3]
The signals take any value from a given range, and each unique signal value represents different information. Any change in the signal is meaningful, and each level of the signal represents a different level of the phenomenon that it represents. For example, suppose the signal is being used to represent temperature, with one volt representing one degree Celsius. In such a system, 10 volts would represent 10 degrees, and 10.1 volts would represent 10.1 degrees.
Another method of conveying an analogue signal is to use modulation. In this, some base carrier signal has one of its properties altered: amplitude modulation (AM) involves altering the amplitude of a sinusoidal voltage waveform by the source information, frequency modulation (FM) changes the frequency. Other techniques, such as phase modulation or changing the phase of the carrier signal, are also used.[4]
In an analogue sound recording, the variation in pressure of a sound striking a microphone creates a corresponding variation in the current passing through it or voltage across it. An increase in the volume of the sound causes the fluctuation of the current or voltage to increase proportionally while keeping the same waveform or shape.
Mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and other systems may also use analogue signals.

Inherent noise[edit]
Analogue systems invariably include noise that is random disturbances or variations, some caused by the random thermal vibrations of atomic particles. Since all variations of an analogue signal are significant, any disturbance is equivalent to a change in the original signal and so appears as noise.[5] As the signal is copied and re-copied, or transmitted over long distances, these random variations become more significant and lead to signal degradation. Other sources of noise may include crosstalk from other signals or poorly designed components. These disturbances are reduced by shielding and by using low-noise amplifiers (LNA).[6]

Analogue vs digital electronics[edit]
A digital signal like USB is inherently an analogue signal
Since the information is encoded differently in analogue and digital electronics, the way they process a signal is consequently different. All operations that can be performed on an analogue signal such as amplification, filtering, limiting, and others, can also be duplicated in the digital domain. Every digital circuit is also an analogue circuit, in that the behaviour of any digital circuit can be explained using the rules of analogue circuits.
The use of microelectronics has made digital devices cheap and widely available.

Noise[edit]
The effect of noise on an analogue circuit is a function of the level of noise.  The greater the noise level, the more the analogue signal is disturbed, slowly becoming less usable.  Because of this, analogue signals are said to "fail gracefully".  Analogue signals can still contain intelligible information with very high levels of noise.  Digital circuits, on the other hand, are not affected at all by the presence of noise until a certain threshold is reached, at which point they fail catastrophically.  For digital telecommunications, it is possible to increase the noise threshold with the use of error detection and correction coding schemes and algorithms.  Nevertheless, there is still a point at which catastrophic failure of the link occurs.[7][8]
In digital electronics, because the information is quantized, as long as the signal stays inside a range of values, it represents the same information. In digital circuits the signal is regenerated at each logic gate, lessening or removing noise.[9][failed verification]  In analogue circuits, signal loss can be regenerated with amplifiers.  However, noise is cumulative throughout the system and the amplifier itself will add to the noise according to its noise figure.[10][11]

Precision[edit]
A number of factors affect how precise a signal is, mainly the noise present in the original signal and the noise added by processing (see signal-to-noise ratio). Fundamental physical limits such as the shot noise in components limits the resolution of analogue signals. In digital electronics additional precision is obtained by using additional digits to represent the signal. The practical limit in the number of digits is determined by the performance of the analogue-to-digital converter (ADC), since digital operations can usually be performed without loss of precision. The ADC takes an analogue signal and changes it into a series of binary numbers. The ADC may be used in simple digital display devices, e. g., thermometers or light meters but it may also be used in digital sound recording and in data acquisition. However, a digital-to-analogue converter (DAC) is used to change a digital signal to an analogue signal. A DAC takes a series of binary numbers and converts it to an analogue signal. It is common to find a DAC in the gain-control system of an op-amp which in turn may be used to control digital amplifiers and filters.[12]

Design difficulty[edit]
Analogue circuits are typically harder to design, requiring more skill than comparable digital systems to conceptualize.[13] An analogue circuit is usually designed by hand because the application is built into the hardware. Digital hardware, on the other hand, has a great deal of commonality across applications and can be mass-produced in a standardised form. Hardware design consists largely of repeated identical blocks and the design process can be highly automated. This is one of the main reasons that digital systems have become more common than analogue devices. However, the application of digital hardware is a function of the software/firmware and creating this is still largely a labour-intensive process.  Since the early 2000s, there were some platforms that were developed which enabled analogue design to be defined using software - which allows faster prototyping. Furthermore, if a digital electronic device is to interact with the real world, it will always need an analogue interface.[14] For example, every digital radio receiver has an analogue preamplifier as the first stage in the receive chain.
Design of analogue circuits has been greatly eased by the advent of software circuit simulators such as SPICE.  IBM developed their own in-house simulator, ASTAP, in the 1970s which used an unusual (compared to other simulators) sparse matrix method of circuit analysis.

Circuit classification[edit]
For broader coverage of this topic, see Electronic circuit.
Analogue circuits can be entirely passive, consisting of resistors, capacitors and inductors.  Active circuits also contain active elements such as transistors.  Traditional circuits are built from lumped elements – that is, discrete components.  However, an alternative is distributed-element circuits, built from pieces of transmission line.

See also[edit]
Analogue computer
Analogue verification
Comparison of analogue and digital recording
Digital data, in contrast to analogue
Linear integrated circuit, an analogue chip
References[edit]


^ Concise Oxford dictionary (10 ed.). Oxford University Press Inc. 1999. ISBN 0-19-860287-1.

^ Plympton, George Washington (1884). The aneroid barometer: its construction and use. D. Van Nostran Co. aneroid barometer.

^ Singmin, Andrew (2001). Beginning Digital Electronics Through Projects. Newnes. p. 9. ISBN 0-7506-7269-2. Signals come from transducers...

^ Miller, Mark R. (2002). Electronics the Easy Way. Barron's Educational Series. pp. 232–239. ISBN 0-7641-1981-8. Until the radio came along...

^ Hsu, Hwei Piao (2003). Schaum's Outline of Theory and Problems of Analogue and Digital Communications. McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 202. ISBN 0-07-140228-4. The presence of noise degrades the performance of communication systems.

^ Carr, Joseph J. (2000). Secrets of RF circuit design. McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 423. ISBN 0-07-137067-6. It is common in microwave systems...

^ Richard Langton Gregory, Even Odder Perceptions, p. 161, Psychology Press, 1994 ISBN 0415061067.

^ Robin Blair, Digital Techniques in Broadcasting Transmission, p. 34, Focal Press, 2002, ISBN 0240805089.

^ Chen, Wai-Kai (2005). The electrical engineering handbook. Academic Press. p. 101. ISBN 0-12-170960-4. Noise from an analogue (or small-signal) perspective...

^ Jon B. Hagen, Radio-Frequency Electronics: Circuits and Applications, p. 203, Cambridge University Press, 1996 ISBN 0521553563.

^ Jonathan Davidson, James Peters, Brian Gracely, Voice Over IP Fundamentals, Cisco Press, 2000 ISBN 1578701686.

^ Scherz, Paul (2006). Practical electronics for inventors. McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 730. ISBN 0-07-145281-8. In order for analog devices... to communicate with digital circuits...

^ "Clocks - Digital and Analog". Math is Fun. Retrieved 2020-12-18.

^ Williams, Jim (1991). Analog circuit design. Newnes. p. 238. ISBN 0-7506-9640-0. Even within companies producing both analog and digital products...


vteElectronicsBranches
Analogue electronics
Digital electronics
Electronic engineering
Instrumentation
Microelectronics
Optoelectronics
Power electronics
Printed electronics
Semiconductor
Schematic capture
Thermal management
Advancedtopics
2020s in computing
Atomtronics
Bioelectronics
List of emerging electronics
Failure of electronic components
Flexible electronics
Low-power electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectronics
Organic electronics
Photonics
Piezotronics
Quantum electronics
Spintronics
Electronicequipment
Air conditioner
Central heating
Clothes dryer
Computer/Notebook
Camera
Dishwasher
Freezer
Home robot
Home cinema
Home theater PC
Information technology
Cooker
Microwave oven
Mobile phone
Networking hardware
Portable media player
Radio
Refrigerator
Robotic vacuum cleaner
Tablet
Telephone
Television
Water heater
Video game console
Washing machine
Applications
Audio equipment
Automotive electronics
Avionics
Control system
Data acquisition
e-book
e-health
Electromagnetic warfare
Electronics industry
Embedded system
Home appliance
Home automation
Integrated circuit
Home appliance
Consumer electronics
Major appliance
Small appliance
Marine electronics
Microwave technology
Military electronics
Multimedia
Nuclear electronics
Open-source hardware
Radar and Radio navigation
Radio electronics
Terahertz technology
Wired and Wireless Communications

Authority control databases: National Czech Republic




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analogue_electronics&oldid=1271429115"
Categories: Analog circuitsElectronic engineeringHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse Oxford spelling from August 2016Articles containing explicitly cited American English-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language textAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from April 2018






 This page was last edited on 24 January 2025, at 00:53 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Analogue electronics




























33 languages


Add topic
















