https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input_device




Input device - Wikipedia

































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Keyboard




Toggle Keyboard subsection





1.1
Types










2
Pointing device




Toggle Pointing device subsection





2.1
Types










3
Sensors




Toggle Sensors subsection





3.1
Types










4
High-degree of freedom input devices








5
Composite devices




Toggle Composite devices subsection





5.1
Examples










6
Video input devices




Toggle Video input devices subsection





6.1
Types










7
Voice recorder




Toggle Voice recorder subsection





7.1
Types










8
Punched paper








9
Other types








10
See also








11
References








12
Further reading








13
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Input device



43 languages




العربيةAzərbaycancaБеларускаяBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançais한국어Հայերենहिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaJawaLietuviųമലയാളംBahasa MelayuNederlandsनेपाल भाषा日本語ਪੰਜਾਬੀPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиதமிழ்Татарча / tatarçaతెలుగుTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng Việt粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Device that provides data and signals to a computer
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (May 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
A common computer input device, a keyboard. A user presses a key which transfers information to a computer.
In computing, an input device is a piece of equipment used to provide data and control signals to an information processing system, such as a computer or information appliance. Examples of input devices include keyboards, computer mice, scanners, cameras, joysticks, and microphones.
Input devices can be categorized based on: 

modality of output (e.g., mechanical motion, audio, visual, etc.)
whether the output is discrete (e.g., pressing of key) or continuous (e.g., a mouse's position, though digitized into a discrete quantity, is fast enough to be considered continuous)
the number of degrees of freedom involved (e.g., two-dimensional traditional mice, or three-dimensional navigators designed for CAD applications)

Keyboard[edit]
Main article: Computer keyboard
See also: Keyboard technology
A keyboard is a human interface device which is represented as a matrix of buttons. Each button, or key, can be used to either input an alphanumeric character to a computer, or to call upon a particular function of the computer. It acts as the main text entry interface for most users.[1]

Types[edit]
Keyboards are available in many form factors, depending on the use case. Standard keyboards can be categorized by its size and number of keys, and the type of switch it employs. Other keyboards cater to specific use cases, such as a numeric keypad or a keyer.
Desktop keyboards are typically large, often have full key travel distance, and features such as multimedia keys and a numeric keypad. Keyboards on laptops and tablets typically compromise on comfort to achieve a thin figure.
There are various switch technologies used in modern keyboards, such as mechanical switches (which use springs), scissor switches (usually found on a laptop keyboard), or a membrane.
Other keyboards do not have physical keys, such as a virtual keyboard, or a projection keyboard.

Ergonomic keyboard
A keyboard placing design emphasis on ergonomics and comfort.
Chorded keyboard
A keyboard used by pressing several keys together.
Thumb keyboard
A miniature keyboard found in PDAs and mobile phones.
Keyer
A chorded keyboard without the board.
Numeric keypad
While some keyboards include one (commonly found on the right side), numeric keypads can be found as independent devices.



Keyboard



Ergonomic keyboard



Chorded keyboard



Thumb keyboard



Keyer



Numeric keypad


Pointing device[edit]
A computer mouse
Main article: Pointing device
A pointing device allows a user to input spatial data to a computer. It is commonly used as a simple and intuitive way to select items on a computer screen on a graphical user interface (GUI), either by moving a mouse pointer, or, in the case of a touch screen, by physically touching the item on screen. Common pointing devices include mice, touchpads, and touch screens.[2]
Whereas mice operate by detecting their displacement on a surface, analog devices, such as 3D mice, joysticks, or pointing sticks, function by reporting their angle of deflection.

Types[edit]
Pointing devices can be classified on:

Whether the input is direct or indirect. With direct input, the input space coincides with the display space, i.e. pointing is done in the space where visual feedback or the pointer appears. Touchscreens and light pens involve direct input. Examples involving indirect input include the mouse and trackball.[3]
Whether the positional information is absolute (e.g. on a touch screen) or relative (e.g., with a mouse that can be lifted and repositioned)
Direct input is almost necessarily absolute, but indirect input may be either absolute or relative.  For example, digitizing graphics tablets that do not have an embedded screen involve indirect input and sense absolute positions and are often run in an absolute input mode, but they may also be set up to simulate a relative input mode like that of a touchpad, where the stylus or puck can be lifted and repositioned. Embedded LCD tablets, which are also referred to as graphics tablet monitors, are the extension of digitizing graphics tablets. They enable users to see the real-time positions via the screen while being used.

mouse
A hand-held pointing device that is moved across a surface.
touchpad or trackpad
A flat surface operated by moving a finger across its surface.
touch screen
A layer placed over a computer screen, used by physically touching it with one's finger or a stylus.
trackball
Similar to a mouse, a trackball has a ball held by a socket. Instead of moving the mouse, the user rolls the ball with their finger.
graphics tablet, digitizer, or drawing tablet
A flat surface on which a stylus is used, often to draw images or capture signatures.



mouse



Digitizer mouse



A large-format graphic tablet by manufacturer Summagraphics (OEM'd to Gerber): The puck's external copper coil can be clearly seen. Note using of a Digitizer mouse with a magnifying glass



touchpad (or trackpad)



pointing stick



touchscreen



trackball



graphics tablet


Sensors[edit]
Main article: Sensor
MEMS sensors (among other devices) used in a mobile device
A sensor is an input device which produces data based on physical properties.[4]
Sensors are commonly found in mobile devices to detect their physical orientation and acceleration, but may also be found in desktop computers in the form of a thermometer used to monitor system temperature.

Types[edit]
Accelerometer
Detects acceleration.
Gyroscope
Detects spatial orientation.
Magnetometer
Similar to a compass, a magnetometer senses magnetic heading.
Proximity sensor
Detects whether an object is in proximity.
Barometer
Measures atmospheric pressure. May be used to determine elevation above sea level.
Ultrasonic transducer
Detects movement and range of objects using ultrasound.
LIDAR
Detects the range of objects using laser.
Thermometer
Measures temperature. Usually uses a thermistor or thermocouple.



An infrared proximity sensor used in a smartphone allows it to turn off its screen when held up to the user's ear.


Some sensors can be built with MEMS, which allows them to be microscopic in size.

High-degree of freedom input devices[edit]
Controllers for use with the Oculus Rift virtual reality system
Some devices allow many continuous degrees of freedom as input. These can be used as pointing devices, but are generally used in ways that don't involve pointing to a location in space, such as the control of a camera angle while in 3D applications. These kinds of devices are typically used in virtual reality systems (CAVEs), where input that registers six degrees of freedom is required.[citation needed]

Composite devices[edit]
Input devices, such as buttons and joysticks, can be combined on a single physical device that could be thought of as a composite device.  Many gaming devices have controllers like this. Technically mice are composite devices, as they both track movement and provide buttons for clicking, but composite devices are generally considered to have more than two different forms of input.

Examples[edit]
Joystick
Consists of a stick pivoting on a stationary base.
Gamepad, or joypad
Hand held device often used to play modern video games.
Paddle
A paddle could be a game controller consisting of a dial and a button, or an input device such as a Griffin PowerMate[5] or a Microsoft Surface Dial.[6]
Racing wheel
An imitation steering wheel that can be used to play racing video games.
Wii Remote
A remote control used with the Nintendo Wii video game console which integrates an accelerometer and pointing capabilities.



Joystick controller



Gamepad (or joypad)



Paddle (game controller) 



Jog dial/shuttle (or knob)



Wii Remote


Video input devices[edit]
Microsoft Kinect sensor, works by detecting human motion visually
Video input devices are used to digitize images or video from the outside world into the computer. The information can be stored in a multitude of formats depending on the user's requirement.
Many video input devices use a camera sensor.

Types[edit]
Digital camera
Digital camcorder
Portable media player
Webcam
Microsoft Kinect Sensor
Image scanner
Fingerprint scanner
Barcode reader
3D scanner
Laser rangefinder
Eye gaze tracker
Voice recorder[edit]
Voice input devices are used to capture sound. In some cases, an audio output device can be used as an input device, in order to capture produced sound. Audio input devices allow a user to send audio info to a computer for processing, recording, or carrying out commands. Devices such as microphones allow users to speak to the computer in order to record a voice message or navigate software. Aside from recording, audio input devices are also used with speech recognition software.

Types[edit]
Microphones
MIDI keyboard or other digital musical instrument
Punched paper[edit]
Punched cards and punched tapes were used often in the 20th century. A punched hole represented a one; its absence represented a zero. A mechanical or optical reader was used to input a punched card or tape.

Other types[edit]
Gesture recognition
Digital pen
Magnetic ink character recognition
Sip-and-puff#Computer input device
See also[edit]
Display device
Peripheral
References[edit]


^ "What is Keyboard | Usage, Function and Types of Keyboard". 21 January 2022.

^ "What is a Pointing Device?". Computer Hope.

^ "Input device". CodeDocs.

^ "Are sensors input or output devices?". Electronic Guidebook. 16 May 2020.

^ Rick Sanchez (6 November 2002). "Griffin PowerMate Review". IGN. Retrieved 10 December 2022. a delightful little device from Griffin Technology that replicates the functionality of the paddle controller you used to have with your old Atari 2600

^ Mark Hachman (12 April 2017). "Griffin's PowerMate is the Surface Dial dead-ringer that's trapped in Mac land". PC World. Retrieved 10 December 2022.


Further reading[edit]
N. P. Milner. 1988
A review of human performance and preferences with different input devices to computer systems. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the British Computer Society on People and computers IV, D. M. Jones and R. Winder (Eds.). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 341–362. ISBN 0-521-36553-8
External links[edit]
"What is an Input Device?". Computer Hope.
vteBasic computer componentsInput devicesPointing devices
Graphics tablet
Game controller
Light pen
Mouse
Optical
Optical trackpad
Pointing stick
Touchpad
Touchscreen
Trackball
Other
Keyboard
Image scanner
Graphics card
GPU
Microphone
Refreshable braille display
Sound card
Sound chip
Webcam
Softcam
Output devices
Monitor
Screen
Refreshable braille display
Printer
Plotter
Speakers
Sound card
Graphics card
Removable  data storage
Disk pack
Floppy disk
Optical disc
CD
DVD
Blu-ray
Flash memory
Memory card
USB flash drive
Computer case
Central processing unit
Microprocessor
Motherboard
Memory
RAM
BIOS
Data storage
HDD
SSD (SATA / NVMe)
SSHD
Power supply
SMPS
MOSFET
Power MOSFET
VRM
Network interface controller
Fax modem
Expansion card
PortsCurrent
Ethernet
USB
Thunderbolt
Analog audio jack
DisplayPort
HDMI
Obsolete
FireWire (IEEE 1394)
Parallel port
Serial port
Game port
PS/2 port
eSATA
DVI
VGA
Related
History of computing hardware
History of computing hardware (1960s–present)
List of pioneers in computer science

Authority control databases: National GermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF data




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Input_device&oldid=1286809958"
Category: Computing input devicesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from May 2022All articles lacking in-text citationsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2022Articles containing video clips






 This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 03:27 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Input device




























43 languages


Add topic
















