https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tally_stick




Tally stick - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Kinds of tallies




Toggle Kinds of tallies subsection





1.1
Possible palaeolithic tally sticks








1.2
Single tally








1.3
Split tally










2
See also








3
Notes








4
References








5
Further reading








6
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Tally stick



27 languages




БългарскиBoarischCatalàČeštinaDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתMagyarമലയാളംBahasa MelayuNederlandsNorsk bokmålPolskiRomânăРусскийSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaதமிழ்Українська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Memory aid device
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (September 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this message)


Medieval English split tally stick (front and reverse view). The stick is notched and inscribed to record a debt owed to the rural dean of Preston Candover, Hampshire, of a tithe of 20d each on 32 sheep, amounting to a total sum of £2 13s. 4d.
A tally stick (or simply a tally[1]) was an ancient memory aid used to record and document numbers, quantities, and messages. Tally sticks first appear as animal bones carved with notches during the Upper Palaeolithic; a notable example is the Ishango Bone. Historical reference is made by Pliny the Elder (AD 23–79) about the best wood to use for tallies, and by Marco Polo (1254–1324) who mentions the use of the tally in China. Tallies have been used for numerous purposes such as messaging and scheduling, and especially in financial and legal transactions, to the point of being currency.


Kinds of tallies[edit]
Single and split tallies from the Swiss Alps, 18th to early 20th century (Swiss Alpine Museum)
There are two principal forms of tally sticks: the single tally and the split tally. A comparable example of this primitive counting device can be found in various types of prayer beads.

Possible palaeolithic tally sticks[edit]
A number of anthropological artefacts have been conjectured to be tally sticks:

The Lebombo bone, dated between 44,200 and 43,000 years old, is a baboon's fibula with 29 distinct notches, discovered within the Border Cave in the Lebombo Mountains of Eswatini.
The so-called Wolf bone (cs) is a prehistoric artefact discovered in 1937 in Czechoslovakia during excavations at Dolní Věstonice, Moravia, led by Karl Absolon. Dated to the Aurignacian, approximately 30,000 years ago, the bone is marked with 55 marks which some believe to be tally marks. The head of an ivory Venus figurine was excavated close to the bone.[2][3]
The Ishango bone is a bone tool, dated to the Upper Palaeolithic era, around 18,000 to 20,000 BC. It is a dark brown length of bone. It has a series of possible tally marks carved in three columns running the length of the tool. It was found in 1950 in Ishango (east Belgian Congo).[4]
Single tally[edit]
The single tally stick was an elongated piece of bone, ivory, wood, or stone which is marked with a system of notches (see: Tally marks). The single tally stick serves predominantly mnemonic purposes. Related to the single tally concept are messenger sticks (used by, e.g., Inuit tribes), the knotted cords, khipus or quipus, as used by the Inca. Greek historian Herodotus (c. 484 – c. 425 BC) reported  the use of a knotted cord by Darius I of Persia (r. 522 – 486 BC).

Split tally[edit]
The split tally became a prevalent technique in medieval Europe, a time characterised by a scarcity of coinage and widespread illiteracy, to document bilateral exchanges and debts. Typically fashioned from squared hazelwood, the stick was inscribed with a series of notches before being split lengthwise. Each party in the transaction retained one half of the marked stick, both pieces bearing identical records. Over the years, this method was refined to the point of becoming virtually impervious to tampering. One such refinement was to make the two halves of the stick of different lengths. The longer part was called stock and was given to the stock holder,[5] which had advanced money (or other items) to the receiver. The shorter portion of the stick was called foil and was given to the party which had received the funds or goods. Using this technique each of the parties had an identifiable record of the transaction. The natural irregularities in the surfaces of the tallies where they were split would mean that only the original two halves would fit back together perfectly, and so would verify that they were matching halves of the same transaction. If one party tried to unilaterally change the value of his half of the tally stick by adding more notches, the absence of those notches would be apparent on the other party's tally stick. The split tally was accepted as legal proof in medieval courts and the Napoleonic Code (1804) still makes reference to the tally stick in Article 1333.[6]  Along the Danube and in Switzerland the tally was still used in the 20th century in rural economies.
The most prominent and best recorded use of the split tally stick or "nick-stick"[7][8] being used as a form of currency[9] was when Henry I introduced the tally stick system in medieval England in around 1100. The tally sticks recorded a payment of taxes, but soon began to circulate in a secondary discount market, being accepted as payment for goods and services at a discount since they could be later presented to the treasury as proof of taxes paid. Then tally sticks began to be issued in advance, in order to finance war and other royal spending, and circulated as "wooden money".[10][11]
The system of tally marks of the Exchequer is described in The Dialogue Concerning the Exchequer as follows:

The manner of cutting is as follows. At the top of the tally a cut is made, the thickness of the palm of the hand, to represent a thousand pounds; then a hundred pounds by a cut the breadth of a thumb; twenty pounds, the breadth of the little finger; a single pound, the width of a swollen barleycorn; a shilling rather narrower; then a penny is marked by a single cut without removing any wood.
The cuts were made the full width of the stick so that, after splitting, the portion kept by the issuer (the stock) exactly matched the piece (the foil) given as a receipt. Each stick had to have the details of the transaction written on it, in ink, to make it a valid record.[12]

Entrance gates to the UK National Archives, Kew, from Ruskin Avenue. The notched vertical elements were inspired by medieval tally sticks.
Royal tallies (debt of the Crown) also played a role in the formation of the Bank of England at the end of the 17th century. In 1697, the bank issued £1 million worth of stock in exchange for £800,000 worth of tallies at par and £200,000 in bank notes. This new stock was said to be "engrafted". The government promised not only to pay the Bank interest on the tallies subscribed but to redeem them over a period of years. The "engrafted" stock was then cancelled simultaneously with the redemption.[13]
The split tally of the Exchequer remained in continuous use in England until 1826, when the conditions required for activation of the Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783 (23 Geo. 3. c. 82), the death of the last Exchequer Chamberlain, came about.[14] In 1834, following the passing of 4 Will. 4. c .15, tally sticks representing six centuries' worth of financial records were ordered to be burned in two furnaces in the Houses of Parliament.[15] The resulting fire set the chimney ablaze and then spread until most of the building was destroyed.[9] This event was described by Charles Dickens in an 1855 article on administrative reform.[16]
Tally sticks feature in the design of the entrance gates to The National Archives at Kew.

See also[edit]
Bamboo and wooden slips
Bamboo tally
Chirograph: a similar system for creating two or more matching copies of a legal document on parchment
Fu (tally)
Measuring rod
Prehistoric numerals
Notes[edit]


^ Harper, Douglas. "tally". Online Etymology Dictionary.

^ Flegg, Graham (2002). Numbers: their history and meaning. Courier Dover Publications. pp. 41–42. ISBN 978-0-486-42165-0.

^ Beckmann, Petr (1971). A History of π (PI). Boulder, Colorado: The Golem Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-911762-12-9.

^ "A very brief history of pure mathematics: The Ishango Bone". University of Western Australia School of Mathematics. Archived from the original on 21 July 2008.

^ Bunt, LNH; Jones PS & Bedient JD (1976) Historical Roots of Early Mathematics,  page 225, Prentice Hall

^ "Code civil, Article 1333". 1804. Retrieved 13 January 2013. Les tailles corrélatives à leurs échantillons font foi entre les personnes qui sont dans l'usage de constater ainsi les fournitures qu'elles font ou reçoivent en détail.

^ "nick-stick". Oxford English Dictionary (3 ed.). 2003.

^ Shenton, Caroline (2012). "Chapter 1: Thursday 16 October 1834, 6am: Mr Hume's Motion for a New House". The Day Parliament Burned Down. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199646708.

^ a b "50 Things That Made the Modern Economy". BBC Radio. BBC. Retrieved 30 March 2018.

^ How swapping gold for wood left England’s citizens short-changed

^ What tally sticks tell us about how money works

^ Clanchy, Michael (1979). From Memory to Written Record (3rd ed.). Oxford, England: Blackwell. p. 125. ISBN 9780631168577.

^ Carswell, John (1993). The South Sea Bubble (Revised ed.). England: Alan Sutton Publishing. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-86299-918-6.

^ Robert, Rudoph (1956). "A Short History of Tallies" (PDF). In Littleton, A. C.; Yamey, B. S. (eds.). Studies in the History of Accounting. London: Sweet & Maxwell. pp. 75–85.

^ Shenton, Caroline (16 October 2013). "The day Parliament burned down". UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 26 August 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2019.

^ Dickens, Charles (1870) [June 27, 1855]. "Administrative Reform". Speeches literary and social by Charles Dickens. Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. pp. 133–134.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)


References[edit]
Maddox, Thomas, ed. (1711). The History and Antiquities of the Exchequer of the Kings of England, in two periods: To wit, from the Norman Conquest, to the End of the Reign of K. John; and from the End of the Reign of K. John, to the End of the Reign of K. Edward II: Taken from Records. London.
Baxter, T. W. (1989). "Early Accounting, The Tally and the Checkerboard". The Accounting Historians Journal. 16 (2): 43–83. doi:10.2308/0148-4184.16.2.43.
Jenkinson, (Sir) Hilary (1924). "Medieval Tallies, Public and Private". Archaeologia. 74: 280–351, 8 Plates.
Carswell, John (1993). The South Sea Bubble (Revised ed.). England: Alan Sutton Publishing Ltd. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-86299-918-6.
Further reading[edit]
Hall, Hubert (1891). The Antiquities and Curiosities of the Exchequer. London: Elliot Stocks.
Henkelman, Wouter F. M.; L. Folmer, Margaretha (2016). "Your Tally is Full! On Wooden Credit Records in and after the Achaemenid Empire". In Kleber, K.; Pirngruber, R. (eds.). Silver, Money and Credit: Festschrift for Robartus J. van der Spek on occasion of his 65th birthday on 18 September 2014. Publications de l'Institut Historique-Archéologique Néerlandais de Stamboul. Vol. 128. Leiden. pp. 129–226.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Jenkinson, (Sir) Hilary (1914). "An original Exchequer Account of 1304 with private Tallies attached". Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of London. 2nd ser. 26: 36–40.
Jenkinson, (Sir) Hilary (1911). "Exchequer Tallies". Archaeologia. 62 (2): 367–80. doi:10.1017/s0261340900008213.
Jenkinson, (Sir) Hilary. "A note supplementary". Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of London. 2nd ser. 25: 29–39.
External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Tally".

Photo of Medieval Exchequer Tallies
Inca khipus
Khipus as ledgers
The Dialogue Concerning the Exchequer
vtePrehistoric technology
Prehistory
Timeline
Outline
Stone Age
Subdivisions
New Stone Age
Technology
history
Glossary
ToolsFarming
Neolithic Revolution
Founder crops
New World crops
Ard / plough
Celt
Digging stick
Domestication
Goad
Irrigation
Secondary products
Sickle
Terracing
Food processing(Paleolithic diet)
Fire
Basket
Cooking
Earth oven
Granaries
Grinding slab
Ground stone
Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük
Qesem cave
Manos
Metate
Mortar and pestle
Pottery
Quern-stone
Storage pits
Hunting
Arrow
Boomerang
throwing stick
Bow and arrow
history
Nets
Spear
spear-thrower
baton
harpoon
Schöningen
woomera
Projectile points
Arrowhead
Transverse
Bare Island
Cascade
Clovis
Cresswell
Cumberland
Eden
Folsom
Lamoka
Manis Mastodon
Plano
Systems
Game drive system
Buffalo jump
Toolmaking
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan
Acheulean
Mousterian
Aurignacian
Clovis culture
Cupstone
Fire hardening
Gravettian culture
Hafting
Hand axe
Grooves
Langdale axe industry
Levallois technique
Lithic core
Lithic reduction
analysis
debitage
flake
Lithic technology
Magdalenian culture
Metallurgy
Microblade technology
Mining
Prepared-core technique
Solutrean industry
Striking platform
Tool stone
Uniface
Yubetsu technique
Other tools
Adze
Awl
bone
Axe
Bannerstone
Blade
prismatic
Bone tool
Bow drill
Burin
Canoe
Oar
Pesse canoe
Chopper
tool
Cleaver
Denticulate tool
Fire plough
Fire-saw
Hammerstone
Knife
Microlith
Quern-stone
Racloir
Rope
Scraper
side
Stone tool
Tally stick
Weapons
Wheel
illustration
ArchitectureCeremonial
Kiva
Pyramid
Standing stones
megalith
row
Stonehenge
Dwellings
Neolithic architecture
long house
British megalith architecture
Nordic megalith architecture
Burdei
Cave
Cliff dwelling
Dugout
Hut
Quiggly hole
Jacal
Longhouse
Mudbrick
Mehrgarh
Pit-house
Pueblitos
Pueblo
Rock shelter
Blombos Cave
Abri de la Madeleine
Sibudu Cave
Roundhouse
Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings
Stone roof
Wattle and daub
Water management
Check dam
Cistern
Flush toilet
Reservoir
Well
Other architecture
Archaeological features
Broch
Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh
Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure
Circular enclosure
Goseck
Cursus
Henge
Thornborough
Megalithic architectural elements
Midden
Oldest extant buildings
Timber circle
Timber trackway
Sweet Track
Arts and cultureMaterial goods
Baskets
Beadwork
Beds
Chalcolithic
Clothing/textiles
timeline
Cosmetics
Glue
Hides
shoes
Ötzi
Jewelry
amber use
Mirrors
Pottery
Cardium
Cord-marked
Grooved ware
Jōmon
Linear
Unstan ware
Sewing needle
Weaving
Wine
winery
wine press
Prehistoric art
Art of the Upper Paleolithic
Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave
List of Stone Age art
Bird stone
Cairn
Carved stone balls
Cave paintings
Cup and ring mark
Geoglyph
Hill figure
Golden hats
Guardian stones
Gwion Gwion rock paintings
painting
pigment
Megalithic art
Petroform
Petroglyph
Petrosomatoglyph
Pictogram
Rock art
Rock cupule
Stone carving
Sculpture
Statue menhir
Stone circle
list
British Isles and Brittany
Venus figurine
Prehistoric music
Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology
Alligator drum
Paleolithic flute
Divje Babe flute
Gudi
Prehistoric religion
Evolutionary origin of religion
Paleolithic religion
Spiritual drug use
Burial
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow
Round barrow
Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites
Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn
Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens
Clava cairn
Court cairn
Cremation
Dolmen
Great dolmen
Funeral pyre
Gallery grave
transepted
wedge-shaped
Grave goods
Jar burial
Long barrow
unchambered
Grønsalen
Megalithic tomb
Mummy
Passage grave
Rectangular dolmen
Ring cairn
Simple dolmen
Stone box grave
Tor cairn
Unchambered long cairn
Other cultural
Archaeoastronomy
sites
lunar calendar
Behavioral modernity
Origin of language
Prehistoric counting
Prehistoric medicine
trepanning
Prehistoric warfare
Symbols
symbolism





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tally_stick&oldid=1251474952"
Categories: MnemonicsMathematical toolsMoneyCurrencyBone carvingsHidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisherArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from September 2010All articles lacking in-text citationsUse dmy dates from December 2015Use British English from December 2015






 This page was last edited on 16 October 2024, at 09:49 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Tally stick




























27 languages


Add topic
















