https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-board_computer




Single-board computer - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Applications








3
Types, standards








4
Form factors








5
See also








6
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Single-board computer



31 languages




العربيةAzərbaycancaБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiItalianoMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsRomânăРусскийسنڌيSlovenčinaСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Not to be confused with Microcomputer.
Computer whose components are on a single printed circuit board
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Single-board computer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
This article needs to be updated. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (June 2022)

 (Learn how and when to remove this message)
The Raspberry Pi (Model 2B shown) is a low-cost single-board computer often used to teach computer science.[1]
A single-board computer (SBC) is a complete computer built on a single circuit board, with microprocessor(s), memory, input/output (I/O) and other features required of a functional computer. Single-board computers are commonly made as demonstration or development systems, for educational systems, or for use as embedded computer controllers. Many types of home computers or portable computers integrate all their functions onto a single printed circuit board.
Unlike a desktop personal computer, single-board computers often do not rely on expansion slots for peripheral functions or expansion. Single-board computers have been built using a wide range of microprocessors. Simple designs, such as those built by computer hobbyists, often use static RAM and low-cost 32- or 64-bit processors like ARM. Other types, such as blade servers, would perform similar to a server computer, only in a more compact format.
A computer-on-module is a type of single-board computer made to plug into a carrier board, baseboard, or backplane for system expansion.[2][3]


History[edit]
An early MMD-1, the world's first true single-board computer, with most chips removed
The first true single-board computer was based on the Intel C8080A, also using Intel's first EPROM, the C1702A. Schematics for the machine, called the "dyna-micro" were published in Radio-Electronics magazine in May 1976. Later that year, production of the system began by E&L Instruments, a Derby, Connecticut-based computer manufacturer, which branded the system as the "Mini Micro Designer 1", intending it for use as a programmable microcontroller for prototyping electronic products.[4][5] The MMD-1 was made famous as an example microcomputer in popular 8080 instruction series of the time.[6]
Early SBCs figured heavily in the early history of home computers, such as the Acorn Electron and the BBC Micro, also developed by Acorn. Other typical early single-board computers like the KIM-1 were often shipped without enclosure, which had to be added by the owner. Other early examples are the Ferguson Big Board, the Ampro Little Board,[7] and the Nascom. Many home computers in the 1980s were single-board computers, with some even encouraging owners to solder upgraded components directly to pre-marked points on the board.
As the PC became more prevalent, SBCs decreased in market share due to their low extensibility. The rapid adoption of IBM's standards for peripherals and the standardization of the PCI bus in the 1990s made motherboards and compatible components and peripherals cheap and ubiquitous, while the development of multimedia platforms such as the CD-ROM and Sound Blaster cards had begun to fast outpace the rate at which users needed to replace their personal computers. These two trends disincentivized single-board computers, and instead encouraged the proliferation of motherboards, which typically housed the CPU and other core components, with peripheral components such as hard disk drive controllers and graphics processors, and even some core components such as RAM modules, located on daughterboards.
Computers began to move back towards fewer boards in the 2000s. As new standards like USB dramatically reduced the variety of peripheral standards motherboards were expected to support, advances in integrated circuit manufacturing provided new chipsets which could provide the functionality of many daughterboards, particularly I/O, in a single chip. By the end of the decade, PC motherboards offered on-board support for disk drives including IDE, SATA, NVMe, RAID, integrated GPU, Ethernet, and traditional I/O such as serial port and parallel port, USB, and keyboard/mouse support. Plug-in "cards" retained their importance as high performance components, such as physically large and complex graphics coprocessors, high-end RAID controllers, and specialized I/O cards such as data acquisition and DSP boards.
The 2010s were defined by rapid and sustained growth in single-board computers, enabled largely by advances in integrated circuit production techniques that made it possible for the first time to include most or all of the core components of a motherboard on a single integrated circuit die. One of the more well known single-board-computers of the decade was the Raspberry Pi, which was built around a custom Broadcom SoC with open-source drivers. Originally intended for education, the Raspberry Pi contained a number of features, such as optimized Linux support and programmable GPIO pins, that were also greatly appealing to hobbyists, who used the Pi, and other comparable SBCs, for projects such as home automation, video game emulation, media streaming, and other experimentation.[8] In industry, the rapid growth of smartphones and other small-scale devices encouraged hardware manufacturers to move towards more frequent use of SoCs and the reduction of motherboards in size, extensibility and complexity, while the proliferation of the Internet of Things increased demand for small, cheap components that would allow unconventional devices to access the Internet. Both of these factors dramatically increased production of single-board computers throughout the decade.
By the mid 2020s, many devices, including smartphones, tablet computers, laptops and other smart devices, are powered by single-board computers which utilize advanced SoCs (System on a Chip). While this has greatly increased performance and power efficiency, it has raised concerns that single-board computers, particularly those built around SoCs, are harder to repair and may be less friendly to attempts to monitor or modify instructions programmed into the boards by manufacturers.[9] The introduction of AI-enabled SBCs, advancements in chip integration, and the rise of eco-friendly designs have further driven the evolution of these systems.[10][11] Raspberry Pi, which gained massive popularity for education and hobbyist projects, went public in 2024, demonstrating the significant demand for SBCs across industries.[12] Modern SBCs now cater to industrial automation, IoT devices, machine learning, and edge computing. Educational SBCs continue to provide accessible platforms for learning programming and electronics, while their industrial counterparts are critical for innovative technologies like autonomous systems.
However, concerns remain about repairability and sustainability. Single-board computers, particularly those built around SoCs, are often harder to repair and less friendly to modifications or monitoring. This has sparked discussions about right-to-repair legislation and the development of more sustainable and modular designs, addressing these concerns while ensuring continued innovation in SBC technology.[13][14]

Applications[edit]
A socket 3 based 486 SBC with power supply and flatscreen
Single-board computers were made possible by increasing the density of integrated circuits. A single-board configuration reduces a system's overall cost, by reducing the number of circuit boards required, and by eliminating connectors and bus driver circuits that would otherwise be used. By putting all the functions on one board, a smaller overall system can be obtained, for example, as in notebook computers. Connectors are a frequent source of reliability problems, so a single-board system eliminates these problems.[15]
Single-board computers are now commonly defined across two distinct architectures: no slots and slot support.
Embedded SBCs are units providing all the required I/O with no provision for plug-in cards. Applications are typically gaming (slot machines, video poker), kiosk, and machine control automation. Embedded SBCs are much smaller than the ATX-type motherboard found in PCs, and provide an I/O mix more targeted to an industrial application, such as on-board digital and analog I/O, on-board bootable flash memory (eliminating the need for a disk drive), no video, etc.
The term single-board computer now generally applies to an architecture where the single-board computer is plugged into a backplane to provide for I/O cards. In the case of PC104, the bus is not a backplane in the traditional sense but is a series of pin connectors allowing I/O boards to be stacked.
Single-board computers are most commonly used in industrial situations where they are used in rackmount format for process control or embedded within other devices to provide control and interfacing. They are used in deep-sea exploration on the ALICE deep sea probes and in outer space, on the Ariane and Pegasus rockets and Space Shuttle.[16] Because of the very high levels of integration, reduced component counts and reduced connector counts, SBCs are often smaller, lighter, more power efficient and more reliable than comparable multi-board computers.[17]
The primary advantage of an ATX motherboard as compared to an SBC is cost. Motherboards are manufactured by the millions for the consumer and office markets allowing tremendous economies of scale. Single-board computers are a market niche and are manufactured less often and at a higher cost. Motherboards and SBCs now offer similar levels of feature integration meaning that a motherboard failure in either standard will require equivalent replacement.

Types, standards[edit]
Ranges of single-board computers include Raspberry Pi, BeagleBoard, Nano Pi, Orange Pi and Banana Pi.[18][19][20][21]
One common variety of single-board computer uses standardized computer form factors intended for use in a backplane enclosure. Some of these types are CompactPCI, PXI, VMEbus, VXI, and PICMG. SBCs have been built around various internal processing structures including the Intel architecture, multiprocessing architectures, and lower power processing systems like RISC and SPARC. In the Intel PC world, the intelligence and interface/control circuitry is placed on a plug-in board that is then inserted into a passive (or active) backplane. The result is similar to having a system built with a motherboard, except that the backplane determines the slot configuration. Backplanes are available with a mix of slots (ISA, PCI, PCI-X, PCI-Express, etc.), usually totaling 20 or fewer, meaning it will fit in a 19" rackmount enclosure (17" wide chassis).
Some single-board computers have connectors that allow a stack of circuit boards, each containing expansion hardware, to be assembled without a traditional backplane. Examples of stacking SBC form factors include PC/104, PC/104-Plus, PCI-104, EPIC, and EBX; these systems are commonly available for use in embedded control systems.
Stack-type SBCs often have memory provided on plug-cards such as SIMMs and DIMMs. Hard drive circuit boards are also not counted for determining if a computer is an SBC or not for two reasons, firstly because the HDD is regarded as a single block storage unit, and secondly because the SBC may not require a hard drive at all as most can be booted from their network connections.

Form factors[edit]
AdvancedTCA
CompactPCI
Embedded Compact Extended (ECX)
Mini-ITX
Multibus
PC/104
PICMG
Pico-ITX
PXI
Qseven
VMEbus
VPX
VXI
96Boards (CE, EE, EETV and IE)
See also[edit]
BeBoard
Computer on module
Embedded system
Motherboard
Plug computer
Single-board microcontroller
System on a chip
List of open-source computing hardware
Raspberry Pi
Nano Pi
Orange Pi
Banana Pi
References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Single-board computers.



^ "Foundation Strategy 2016–2018" (PDF). Raspberry Pi. Raspberry Pi Foundation. pp. 3–5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016.

^ "COM – Based SBCs: The Superior Architecture for Small Form Factor Embedded Systems" (PDF). Diamond Systems Corp. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ "Implementing High Performance Embedded Computing Hardware" (PDF). Trenton Systems, Inc. September 1, 2016. pp. 13–15. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016.

^ "E&L Instruments | OpenCorporates". opencorporates.com. Retrieved 2023-03-06.

^ "Mini-Micro Designer 1 (MMD1)". www.decodesystems.com. Retrieved 2023-03-06.

^ "Virginia Information". www.bugbookcomputermuseum.com. Retrieved 2023-03-06.

^ "Ampro Little Board". Archived from the original on 2020-02-07. Retrieved 2020-09-05.

^ Cawley, Christian (2019-12-10). "19 Awesome Uses for a Raspberry Pi". MUO. Retrieved 2023-03-06.

^ "What You Should Know About Right to Repair". Wirecutter: Reviews for the Real World. 2021-07-15. Retrieved 2023-03-06.

^ Palumbo, Angela. "AI PCs and Chips Are A Highlight at CES. Demand Concerns Remain". barrons. Retrieved 2025-01-15.

^ Davis, Anthony (2024-08-02). "Tachyon 5G, AI-Enabled, Edge Single-Board Computer announced Tachyon 5G, AI-Enabled, Edge Single-Board Computer announced". Highways Today. Retrieved 2025-01-15.

^ Dillet, Romain (2024-06-11). "Raspberry Pi is now a public company". TechCrunch. Retrieved 2025-01-15.

^ "The right to repair electronics is now law in 3 states. Is Big Tech complying?". Route Fifty. 2024-08-28. Retrieved 2025-01-15.

^ "What You Need To Know About the Right To Repair Act in 2024". Built In. Retrieved 2025-01-15.

^ Winn Rosch, Hardware Bible Fifth Edition, Que, 1999 ISBN 0-7897-1743-3 pp. 50-51

^ "Single Board Computer Peripherals". Newmicros. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved July 7, 2017.

^ "A UHF RFID Printed Circuit Board Solution". Magicstrap. January 2012. p. 4. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016.

^ updated, Brian Westover last (2021-05-27). "Raspberry Pi 4 Model B review". Tom's Guide. Retrieved 2023-04-29.

^ Manager, Content (2023-01-29). "BeagleBone Black Review". ElectronicsHacks. Retrieved 2023-04-29.

^ Alderson, Alex. "FriendlyELEC introduces new NanoPi R6C single-board computer for US$89". Notebookcheck. Retrieved 2023-04-29.

^ "Introducing the Banana Pi BPI-M5 Pro with RK3576 SoC". Boardor. Retrieved 2025-01-18.


vteSingle-board computer and single-board microcontrollerDevices
Arduino
Arndale Board
Asus Tinker Board
Banana Pi
BeagleBoard
Cotton Candy
CHIP
Cubieboard
Edison
Galileo
Gumstix
Hawkboard
IGEPv2
LattePanda
Nvidia Drive
Nano Pi
Nvidia Jetson
ODROID
OLinuXino
PandaBoard
Pine64
Parallella
Rascal
Raspberry Pi
Snowball
UDOO
Vaaman
SoCsARM
Actions
Allwinner
Ax
Apple M1
Exynos
i.MX
HiSiliconK3V3
MediaTek
Nomadik
NovaThor
OMAP
Rockchip
Qualcomm Snapdragon
Tegra
WonderMedia
MIPS
Jz
x86/x86-64
AMD Élan
Atom
Jaguar-based
Puma-based
Quark
Software
Apache Hadoop
Linaro

vteComputer sizes and classesMicroStaticAppliances
Arcade cabinet
Diskless node
Internet appliance
Intelligent terminal
Interactive kiosk
Rich client
Simulator
Smart speaker
Smart TV
Thin client
Video game console
Home console
Microconsole
ComputersBy use
Gaming
Home
Industrial
Personal
Personal super
Public
Server
Home server
Workstation
By size
All-in-one
Panel
Tabletop
Surface
Desktop
Deskside
Pizza box
Tower
Portable
Small form factor
Mini PC
Plug
Stick PC
Rack
Blade server
Blade PC
MobileLaptop
2-in-1
Convertible
Cloudbook
Mobile workstation
Notebook
Subnotebook
Netbook
Smartbook
Tablet
Detachable
Phablet
Handheld
Electronic organizer
E-reader
Handheld game console
Handheld PC
Mobile data terminal
Mobile phone
Camera
Feature
Smartphone
Foldable
Palmtop PC
Personal digital assistant
Pocket
Portable data terminal
Portable media player
Siftable
Ultra-mobile PC
Calculator
Graphing
Programmable
Scientific
Wearable
Fitness tracker
Smart band
Digital wristwatch
Calculator watch
Smartwatch
Sportwatch
Smartglasses
Smart ring
Midrange
Mini
Supermini
Large
Grid
Mainframe
Minisuper
Super
Others
Embedded system
Information appliance
Microcontroller
Nano
Rugged
Rugged smartphone
Single-board
Computer-on-module
Smartdust
Wireless sensor network

 Category

vteEmbedded systemsGeneral terms
ASIC
Board support package
Bootloader
Consumer electronics
Cross compiler
Embedded database
Embedded hypervisor
Embedded OS
Embedded software
FPGA
IoT
Memory footprint
Microcontroller
Single-board computer
Raspberry Pi
SoC
Firmware and controls
Firmware
Custom firmware
Proprietary firmware
Closed platform
Crippleware
Defective by Design
Hacking of consumer electronics
Homebrew (video games)
iOS jailbreaking
PlayStation 3 Jailbreak
Rooting (Android)
UEFI
Vendor lock-in
Boot loaders
U-Boot
Barebox
Software libraries
uClibc
dietlibc
Embedded GLIBC
lwIP
musl
Programming tools
Almquist shell
BitBake
Buildroot
BusyBox
OpenEmbedded
Stand-alone shell
Toybox
Yocto Project
Operating systems
Linux on embedded systems
Linux for mobile devices
Light-weight Linux distribution
Real-time operating system
Windows IoT
Win CE
Programming languages
Ada
Assembly language
CAPL
Embedded C
Embedded C++
Embedded Java
MISRA C
MicroPython

Lightweight browsers
List of open-source hardware
Open-source robotics

Authority control databases: National Germany




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Single-board_computer&oldid=1277692160"
Categories: MicrocomputersSingle-board computersHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from December 2022All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2022All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles with multiple maintenance issuesCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 26 February 2025, at 04:10 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Single-board computer




























31 languages


Add topic
















